
ALGEBRA







HEIMAttft




&lt;*7




512




BOU




0639





Elements of Mathematics
Algebra I



AGTUALITES SCIENTIFIQUES ET INDUSTRIELLES
HERMANN

ADIWES INTERNATIONAL SERIES
IN MATHEMATICS

A. J. Lohwater, Consulting Editor



NICOLAS BOURBAKI
Elements of Mathematics



English Translations published:
General Topology, Part I, 1966
General Topology, Part II, 1966
Theory of Sets, 1968
Commutative Algebra, 1972
Algebra, Part I, 1973

In preparation:

Algebra, Part II

Functions of a Real Variable

Integration

Lie Groups and Lie Algebras

Spectral Theories

Topological Vector Spaces



NICOLAS BOURBAKI



Elements of Mathematics

Algebra I

Chapters 1-3



*



HERMANN, PUBLISHERS IN ARTS AND SCIENCE
293 rue Lecourbe, 75015 Paris, France

A
▼T

ADDISON-WESLEY PUBLISHING COMPANY

Advanced Book Program
Reading, Massachusetts



Originally published as
ELEMENTS DE MATHEMATIQUE, ALGEBRE

© 1943, 1947, 1948, 1971 by Hermann, Paris



^



PRESTON
POLYTECHNIC



5S96{



£^



00



ISBN 2-7056-5675-8 (Hermann)
ISBN 0-201-00639-1 (Addison-Wesley)

Library of Congress catalog card number LG 72-5558

American Mathematical Society (MOS) Subject
Classification Scheme (1970): 15-A03, 15-A69, 15-A75, 15-A78

Printed in Great Britain



© 1974 by Hermann. All rights reserved

This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form without

the publisher's written permission



TO THE READER



1. This series of volumes, a list of which is given on pages ix and x, takes up
mathematics at the beginning, and gives complete proofs. In principle, it
requires no particular knowledge of mathematics on the readers' part, but only
a certain familiarity with mathematical reasoning and a certain capacity for
abstract thought. Nevertheless, it is directed especially to those who have a
good knowledge of at least the content of the first year or two of a university
mathematics course.

2. The method of exposition we have chosen is axiomatic and abstract, and
normally proceeds from the general to the particular. This choice has been
dictated by the main purpose of the treatise, which is to provide a solid
foundation for the whole body of modern mathematics. For this it is indis-
pensable to become familiar with a rather large number of very general ideas
and principles. Moreover, the demands of proof impose a rigorously fixed order
on the subject matter. It follows that the utility of certain considerations will
not be immediately apparent to the reader unless he has already a fairly
extended knowledge of mathematics; otherwise he must have the patience to
suspend judgment until the occasion arises.

3. In order to mitigate this disadvantage we have frequently inserted examples
in the text which refer to facts the reader may already know but which have
not yet been discussed in the series. Such examples are always placed between
two asterisks : *•••*. Most readers will undoubtedly find that these examples
will help them to understand the text, and will prefer not to leave them out,
even at a first reading. Their omission would of course have no disadvantage,
from a purely logical point of view.

4. This series is divided into volumes (here called "Books"). The first six
Books are numbered and, in general, every statement in the text assumes as
known only those results which have already been discussed in the preceding



TO THE READER

volumes. This rule holds good within each Book, but for convenience of expo-
sition these Books are no longer arranged in a consecutive order. At the begin-
ning of each of these Books (or of these chapters), the reader will find a precise
indication of its logical relationship to the other Books and he will thus be
able to satisfy himself of the absence of any vicious circle.

5. The logical framework of each chapter consists of the definitions, the axioms,
and the theorems of the chapter. These are the parts that have mainly to be
borne in mind for subsequent use. Less important results and those which can
easily be deduced from the theorems are labelled as "propositions", "lemmas",
"corollaries", "remarks", etc. Those which may be omitted at a first reading
are printed in small type. A commentary on a particularly important theorem
appears occasionally under the name of "scholium".

To avoid tedious repetitions it is sometimes convenient to introduce nota-
tions or abbreviations which are in force only within a certain chapter or a
certain section of a chapter (for example, in a chapter which is concerned only
with commutative rings, the word "ring" would always signify "commutative
ring"). Such conventions are always explicitly mentioned, generally at the
beginning of the chapter in which they occur.

6. Some passages in the text are designed to forewarn the reader against
serious errors. These passages are signposted in the margin with the sign

^ ("dangerous bend").

7. The Exercises are designed both to enable the reader to satisfy himself that
he has digested the text and to bring to his notice results which have no place
in the text but which are nonetheless of interest. The most difficult exercises
bear the sign \.

8. In general, we have adhered to the commonly accepted terminology,
except where there appeared to be good reasons for deviating from it.

9. We have made a particular effort always to use rigorously correct language,
without sacrificing simplicity. As far as possible we have drawn attention in the
text to abuses of language, without which any mathematical text runs the risk of
pedantry, not to say unreadability.

10. Since in principle the text consists of the dogmatic exposition of a theory,
it contains in general no references to the literature. Bibliographical references
are gathered together in Historical Notes, usually at the end of each chapter.
These notes also contain indications, where appropriate, of the unsolved
problems of the theory.

The bibliography which follows each historical note contains in general
only those books and original memoirs which have been of the greatest impor-
tance in the evolution of the theory under discussion. It makes no sort of pre-

vi



TO THE READER

tence to completeness; in particular, references which serve only to determine
questions of priority are almost always omitted.

As to the exercises, we have not thought it worthwhile in general to indicate
their origins, since they have been taken from many different sources (original
papers, textbooks, collections of exercises) .

11. References to a part of this series are given as follows:

a) If reference is made to theorems, axioms, or definitions presented in the same
section, they are quoted by their number.

b) If they occur in another section of the same chapter, this section is also quoted in
the reference.

c) If they occur in another chapter in the same Book, the chapter and section are
quoted.

d) If they occur in another Book, this Book is first quoted by its title.

The Summaries of Results are quoted by the letter R; thus Set Theory, R
signifies "Summary of Results of the Theory of Sets".



vu



CONTENTS

OF

THE ELEMENTS OF MATHEMATICS SERIES



I. Theory of sets

1. Description of formal mathematics. 2. Theory of sets. 3. Ordered sets;
cardinals; natural numbers. 4. Structures.

II. Algebra

1. Algebraic structures. 2. Linear algebra. 3. Tensor algebras, exterior
algebras, symmetric algebras. 4. Polynomials and rational fractions.
5. Fields. 6. Ordered groups and fields. 7. Modules over principal ideal
rings. 8. Semi-simple modules and rings. 9. Sesquilinear and quadratic
forms.

III. General topology

1. Topological structures. 2. Uniform structures. 3. Topological groups.
4. Real numbers. 5. One-parameter groups. 6. Real number spaces,
affine and projective spaces. 7. The additive groups R n . 8. Complex
numbers. 9. Use of real numbers in general topology. 10. Function
spaces.

IV. Functions of a real variable

1 . Derivatives. 2. Primitives and integrals. 3. Elementary functions.
4. Differential equations. 5. Local study of functions. 6. Generalized
Taylor expansions. The Euler-Maclaurin summation formula. 7. The gam-
ma function. Dictionary.

V. Topological vector spaces

1. Topological vector spaces over a valued field. 2. Convex sets and locally
convex spaces. 3. Spaces of continuous linear mappings. 4. Duality in topo-
logical vector spaces. 5. Hilbert spaces: elementary theory. Dictionary.

VI. Integration

1. Convexity inequalities. 2. Riesz spaces. 3. Measures on locally com-
pact spaces. 4. Extension of a measure. L p spaces. 5. Integration of mea-
sures. 6. Vectorial integration. 7. Haar measure. 8. Convolution and
representation.



contents of the elements of mathematics series

Lie groups and lie algebras
1. Lie algebras. 2. Free Lie algebras. 3. Lie groups. 4. Coxeter groups
and Tits systems. 5. Groups generated by reflections. 6. Root systems.

Commutative algebra

1. Flat modules. 2. Localization. 3. Graduations, nitrations, and topo-
logies. 4. Associated prime ideals and primary decomposition. 5. Integers.
6. Valuations. 7. Divisors.

Spectral theory
1 . Normed algebras. 2. Locally compact groups.

Differential and Analytic Manifolds
Summary of results.



CONTENTS



To the Reader v

Contents of the Elements of Mathematics Series ix

Introduction xxi

Chapter I. Algebraic Structures 1

§ 1. Laws of composition; associativity; commutativity 1

1 . Laws of composition 1

2. Composition of an ordered sequence of elements 3

3. Associative laws 4

4. Stable subsets. Induced laws 6

5. Permutable elements. Commutative laws 7

6. Quotient laws 11

§ 2. Identity element; cancellable elements; invertible elements . . 12

1. Identity element 12

2. Cancellable elements 14

3. Invertible elements 15

4. Monoid effractions of a commutative monoid 17

5. Applications: I. Rational integers 20

6. Applications: II. Multiplication of rational integers 22

7. Applications: III. Generalized powers 23

8. Notation 23

§ 3. Actions 24

1. Actions 24

2. Subsets stable under an action. Induced action 26

3. Quotient action 26

4. Distributivity 27

5. Distributivity of one internal law with respect to another. 29



CONTENTS

§ 4. Groups and groups with operators 30

1 . Groups 30

2. Groups with operators 31

3. Subgroups 32

4. Quotient groups 34

5. Decomposition of a homomorphism 37

6. Subgroups of a quotient group 38

7. The Jordan-Holder theorem 41

8. Products and fibre products 45

9. Restricted sums 47

10. Monogenous groups 48

§ 5. Groups operating on a set 52

1. Monoid operating on a set 52

2. Stabilizer, fixer 54

3. Inner automorphisms 55

4. Orbits 56

5. Homogeneous sets 58

6. Homogeneous principal sets 60

7. Permutation groups of a finite set 61

§ 6. Extensions, solvable groups, nilpotent groups 65

1. Extensions 65

2. Commutators 68

3. Lower central series, nilpotent groups 71

4. Derived series, solvable groups 74

5. /(-groups 76

6. Sylow subgroups 78

7. Finite nilpotent groups 80

§ 7. Free monoids, free groups 81

1. Free magmas 81

2. Free monoids 82

3. Amalgamated sum of monoids 84

4. Application to free monoids 88

5. Free groups 89

6. Presentations of a group 90

7. Free commutative groups and monoids 92

8. Exponential notation 94

9. Relations between the various free objects 95

§ 8. Rings 96

1. Rings 96

2. Consequences of distributivity 98



xu



CONTENTS



3. Examples of rings 101

4. Ring homomorphisms 102

5. Subrings 103

6. Ideals 103

7. Quotient rings 105

8. Subrings and ideals in a quotient ring 106

9. Multiplication of ideals 107

10. Product of rings 108

1 1 . Direct decomposition of a ring 110

12. Rings of fractions 112

§ 9. Fields 114

1. Fields 1 14

2. Integral domains 116

3. Prime ideals 116

4. The field of rational numbers 117

§ 10. Inverse and direct limits 118

1 . Inverse systems of magmas 118

2. Inverse limits of actions 119

3. Direct systems of magmas 120

4. Direct limit of actions 123

Exercises for § 1 124

Exercises for § 2 126

Exercises for § 3 129

Exercises for § 4 132

Exercises for § 5 140

Exercises for § 6 147

Exercises for § 7 159

Exercises for § 8 171

Exercises for § 9 1 74

Exercises for § 10 1 79

Historical note 180

Chapter II. Linear Algebra 191

§ 1. Modules 191

1. Modules; vector spaces; linear combinations 191

2. Linear mappings 194

3. Submodules; quotient modules 196



CONTENTS

4. Exact sequences 197

5. Products of modules 200

6. Direct sum of modules 202

7. Intersection and sum of submodules 205

8. Direct sums of submodules 208

9. Supplementary submodules 210

10. Modules of finite length 212

11. Free families. Bases 214

12. Annihilators. Faithful modules. Monogenous modules ... 219

13. Change of the ring of scalars 221

14. Multimodules 224

§ 2. Modules of linear mappings. Duality 227

1. Properties of Hom A (E, F) relative to exact sequences 227

2. Projective modules 23 1

3. Linear forms; dual of a module 232

4. Orthogonality 234

5. Transpose of a linear mapping 234

6. Dual of a quotient module. Dual of a direct sum. Dual bases 236

7. Bidual 239

8. Linear equations 240

§ 3. Tensor products 243

1. Tensor product of two modules 243

2. Tensor product of two linear mappings 245

3. Change of ring 246

4. Operators on a tensor product; tensor products as multi-

modules 247

5. Tensor product of two modules over a commutative ring 249

6. Properties of E ® A F relative to exact sequences 251

7. Tensor products of products and direct sums 254

8. Associativity of the tensor product 258

9. Tensor product of families of multimodules 259

§ 4. Relations between tensor products and homomorphism modules 267

1 . The isomorphisms

Hom B (E ® A F, G) -&gt; Hom A (F, Hom B (E, G))
and

Hom c (E A F, G) -&gt; Hom A (E, Hom c (F, G)) 267

2. The homomorphism E* ® A F -&gt; Hom A (E, F) 268

3. Trace of an endomorphism 273

4. The homomorphism

Hom (Ej, F x ) C Hom c (E 2 , F 2 )

-&gt;Hom c (E 1 ® c E 2 ,F 1 ® c F 2 ) 274



xiv



CONTENTS

§ 5. Extension of the ring of scalars 277

1. Extension of the ring of scalars of a module 277

2. Relations between restriction and extension of the ring of

scalars 280

3. Extension of the ring of operators of a homomorphism

module 282

4. Dual of a module obtained by extension of scalars 283

5. A criterion for finiteness 284

§ 6. Inverse and direct limits of modules 284

1. Inverse limits of modules 284

2. Direct limits of modules 286

3. Tensor product of direct limits 289

§ 7. Vector spaces 292

1 . Bases of a vector space 292

2. Dimension of vector spaces 293

3. Dimension and codimension of a subspace of a vector space 295

4. Rank of a linear mapping 298

5. Dual of a vector space 299

6. Linear equations in vector spaces 304

7. Tensor product of vector spaces 306

8. Rank of an element of a tensor product 309

9. Extension of scalars for a vector space 310

10. Modules over integral domains 312

§ 8. Restriction of the field of scalars in vector spaces 317

1. Definition of K'-structures 317

2. Rationality for a subspace 318

3. Rationality for a linear mapping 319

4. Rational linear forms 320

5. Application to linear systems 321

6. Smallest field of rationality 322

7. Criteria for rationality 323

§ 9. Affine spaces and projective spaces 325

1. Definition of affine spaces 325

2. Barycentric calculus 326

3. Affine linear varieties 327

4. Affine linear mappings 329

5. Definition of projective spaces 331

6. Homogeneous coordinates 331

7. Projective linear varieties 332

8. Projective completion of an affine space 333

9. Extension of rational functions 334

xv



CONTENTS

10. Projective linear mappings 335

11. Projective space structure 337

§ 10. Matrices 338

1 . Definition of matrices 338

2. Matrices over a commutative group 339

3. Matrices over a ring 341

4. Matrices and linear mappings 342

5. Block products 346

6. Matrix of a semi-linear mapping 347

7. Square matrices 349

8. Change of bases 352

9. Equivalent matrices; similar matrices 354

10. Tensor product of matrices over a commutative ring .... 356

1 1 . Trace of a matrix 358

12. Matrices over a field 359

13. Equivalence of matrices over a field 360

§11. Graded modules and rings 363

1 . Graded commutative groups 363

2. Graded rings and modules 364

3. Graded submodules 367

4. Case of an ordered group of degrees 371

5. Graded tensor product of graded modules 374

6. Graded modules of graded homomorphisms 375

Appendix. Pseudomodules 378

1 . Adjunction of a unit element to a pseudo-ring 378

2. Pseudomodules 378

Exercises for § 1 380

Exercises for § 2 386

Exercises for § 3 395

Exercises for § 4 396

Exercises for § 5 398

Exercises for § 6 399

Exercises for § 7 400

Exercises for § 8 409

Exercises for § 9 410

Exercises for § 10 417



xvi



CONTENTS

Exercises for § 1 1 424

Exercise for the Appendix 425

Chapter III. Tensor Algebras, Exterior Algebras, Symmetric

Algebras 427

§ 1. Algebras 428

1 . Definition of an algebra 428

2. Subalgebras. Ideals. Quotient algebras 429

3. Diagrams expressing associativity and commutativity 431

4. Products of algebras 432

5. Restriction and extension of scalars 433

6. Inverse and direct limits of algebras 434

7. Bases of an algebra. Multiplication table 436

§ 2. Examples of algebras 438

1 . Endomorphism algebras 438

2. Matrix elements 438

3. Quadratic algebras 439

4. Cayley algebras 441

5. Construction of Cayley algebras. Quaternions 443

6. Algebra of a magma, a monoid, a group 446

7. Free algebras 448

8. Definition of an algebra by generators and relations 450

9. Polynomial algebras 452

10. Total algebra of a monoid 454

1 1 . Formal power series over a commutative ring 455

§ 3. Graded algebras 457

1. Graded algebras 457

2. Graded subalgebras, graded ideals of a graded algebra .. 459

3. Direct limits of graded algebras 460

§ 4. Tensor products of algebras 460

1. Tensor product of a finite family of algebras 460

2. Universal characterization of tensor products of algebras 463

3. Modules and multimodules over tensor products of algebras 465

4. Tensor product of algebras over a field 468

5. Tensor product of an infinite family of algebras 470

6. Commutation lemmas 472

7. Tensor product of graded algebras relative to commutation

factors 474

8. Tensor product of graded algebras of the same types 480

9. Anticommutative algebras and alternating algebras 482

xvii



CONTENTS

§ 5. Tensor algebra. Tensors 484

1. Definition of the tensor algebra of a module 484

2. Functorial properties of the tensor algebra 485

3. Extension of the ring of scalars 489

4. Direct limit of tensor algebras 490

5. Tensor algebra of a direct sum. Tensor algebra of a free

module. Tensor algebra of a graded module 491

6. Tensors and tensor notation 492

§ 6. Symmetric algebras 497

1 . Symmetric algebra of a module 497

2. Functorial properties of the symmetric algebra 498

3. n-th symmetric power of a module and symmetric multi-

linear mappings 500

4. Extension of the ring of scalars 502

5. Direct limit of symmetric algebras 503

6. Symmetric algebra of a direct sum. Symmetric algebra of a

free module. Symmetric algebra of a graded module . . 503

§ 7. Exterior algebras 507

1 . Definition of the exterior algebra of a module 507

2. Functorial properties of the exterior algebra 508

3. Anticommutativity of the exterior algebra 510

4. n-th. exterior pqwer of a module and alternating multi-

linear mappings 511

5. Extension of the ring of scalars 513

6. Direct limits of exterior algebras 514

7. Exterior algebra of a direct sum. Exterior algebra of a

graded module 515

8. Exterior algebra of a free module 517

9. Criteria for linear independence 519

§ 8. Determinants 522

1. Determinants of an endomorphism 522

2. Characterization of automorphisms of a finite-dimensional

free module 523

3. Determinant of a square matrix 524

4. Calculation of a determinant 526

5. Minors of a matrix 528

6. Expansions of a determinant 530

7. Application to linear equations 534

8. Case of a commutative field 536

9. The unimodular group SL(/z, A) 537



CONTENTS

10. The A[X]-module associated with an A-module endo-

morphism 538

1 1 . Characteristic polynomial of an endomorphism 540

§ 9. Norms and traces 541

1. Norms and traces relative to a module 541

2. Properties of norms and traces relative to a module 542

3. Norm and trace in an algebra 543

4. Properties of norms and traces in an algebra 545

5. Discriminant of an algebra 549

§ 10. Derivations 550

1 . Commutation factors 550

2. General definition of derivations 551

3. Examples of derivations 553

4. Composition of derivations 554

5. Derivations of an algebra A into an A-module 557

6. Derivations of an algebra 559

7. Functorial properties 560

8. Relations between derivations and algebra homomor-

phisms 561

9. Extension of derivations 562

10. Universal problem for derivations: non-commutative case 567

11. Universal problem for derivations: commutative case 568

12. Functorial properties of PC-differentials 570

§11. Cogebras, products of multilinear forms, inner products and

duality 574

1. Cogebras 574

2. Coassociativity, cocommutativity, counit 578

3. Properties of graded cogebras of type N 584

4. Bigebras and skew-bigebras 585

5. The graded duals T(M) * gr , S(M)** r and A (M)** r . . . . . 587

6. Inner products : case of algebras 594

7. Inner products : case of cogebras 597

8. Inner products : case of bigebras 600

9. Inner products betweenT(M) andT(M*), S(M) and S(M*),

A (M) and A (M*) 603

10. Explicit form of inner products in the case of a finitely

generated free module 605

11. Isomorphisms between A P (M) and A" P (M*) for an n-

dimensional free module M 607

12. Application to the subspace associated with a /(-vector 608

13. Pure /^-vectors. Grassmannians 609



CONTENTS

Appendix. Alternative algebras. Octonions 611

1 . Alternative algebras 611

2. Alternative Gayley algebras 613

3. Octonions 615

Exercises for § 1 618

Exercises for § 2 618

Exercises for § 3 626

Exercises for § 4 626

Exercises for § 5 627

Exercises for § 6 632

Exercises for § 7 633

Exercises for § 8 637

Exercises for § 9 644

Exercises for § 10 645

Exercises for §11 647

Exercises for the Appendix 654

Historical Note on Chapters II and III 655

Index of Notation 669

Index of Terminology 677



INTRODUCTION



Algebra is essentially concerned with calculating, that is, performing, on ele-
ments of a set, "algebraic operations", the most well-known example of which
is provided by the "four rules" of elementary arithmetic.

This is not the place to retrace the slow process of progressive abstraction by
which the notion of algebraic operation, at first restricted to natural numbers
and measurable magnitudes, little by little enlarged its domain, whilst the
notion of "number" received a parallel generalization, until, passing beyond
the latter, it came to be applied to elements with no "numerical" character, for
example permutations of a set (see the Historical Note to Chapter I). It is no
doubt the possibility of these successive extensions, in which the form of the
calculations remained the same, whereas the nature of the mathematical entities
subjected to these calculations varied considerably, which was responsible for
the gradual isolation of the guiding principle of modern mathematics, namely
that mathematical entities in themselves are of little importance; what matters
are their relations (see Book I). It is certain in any case that Algebra attained
this level of abstraction well before the other branches of Mathematics and
it has long been accustomed to being considered as the study of algebraic
operations, independent of the mathematical entities to which they can be
applied.

Deprived of any specific character, the common notion underlying the usual
algebraic operations is very simple : performing an algebraic operation on two
elements a, b of the same set E, means associating with the ordered pair (a, b)
a well-defined third element c of the set E. In other words, there is nothing more
in this notion than that of function: to be given an algebraic operation is to be
given a function defined on E x E and taking its values in E; the only peculi-
arity lies in the fact that the set of definition of the function is the product of
two sets identical with the set where the function takes its values; to such a func-
tion we give the name law of composition.

Alongside these "internal laws", mathematicians have been led (chiefly



xxi



INTRODUCTION

under the influence of Geometry) to consider another type of "law of composi-
tion"; these are the "laws of action", where, besides the set E (which remains
as it were in the foreground), an auxiliary set Q occurs, whose elements are
called operators: the law this time associating with an ordered pair (a, a) con-
sisting of an operator a e Q and an element a e E a second element b of E. For
example a homothety of given centre on the Euclidean space E associates with
a real number k (the "homothety ratio", which is here the operator) and a
point A of E another point A' of E : this is a law of action on E.

In conformity with the general definitions (Set Theory, IV, § 1, no. 4), being
given on a set E one or several laws of composition or laws of action defines a
structure on E; for the structures defined in this way we reserve precisely the
name algebraic structures and it is the study of these which constitutes Algebra.

There are several species (Set Theory, IV, § 1, no. 4) of algebraic structures,
characterized on the one hand by the laws of composition or laws of action
which define them and on the other by the axioms to which these laws are sub-
jected. Of course, these axioms have not been chosen arbitrarily, but are just
the properties of most of the laws which occur in applications, such as associ-
ativity, commutativity, etc. Chapter I is essentially devoted to the exposition
of these axioms and the general consequences which follow from them; also
there is a more detailed study of the two most important species of algebraic
structure, that of a group (in which only one law of composition occurs) and that
of a ring (with two laws of composition), of which afield structure is a special
case.

In Chapter I are also found the definitions of groups with operators and rings
with operators, where, besides the laws of composition, there occur one or several
laws of action. The most important groups with operators are modules, of which
vector spaces are a particular example, which play an important role both in
Classical Geometry and in Modern Analysis. The study of module structures
derives its origin from that of linear equations, whence its name Linear Algebra;
the results on this subject are to be found in Chapter II.

Similarly, the rings with operators which occur most often are called algebras
(or hypercomplex systems). In Chapters III and IV a detailed study is made of
two particular types of algebras : exterior algebras, which with the theory of
determinants which is derived from them is a valuable tool of Linear Algebra;
and polynomial algebras, which are fundamental to the theory of algebraic
equations.

In Chapter V there is an exposition of the general theory of commutative
fields and their classification. The origin of this theory is the study of algebraic
equations in one unknown; the questions which gave birth to this today have
little more than a historical interest, but the theory of commutative fields re-
mains fundamental to Algebra, being basic to the theory of algebraic numbers
on the one hand and Algebraic Geometry on the other.

As the set of natural numbers has two laws of composition, addition and



INTRODUCTION

multiplication, Classical Arithmetic (or Number Theory), which is the study of
natural numbers, is subordinate to Algebra. However, related to the algebraic
structure defined by these two laws is the structure defined by the order relation
"a divides b"; and the distinguishing aspect of Classical Arithmetic is precisely
the study of the relations between these two associated structures. This is not
the only example where an order structure is thus associated with an algebraic
structure by a "divisibility" relation: this relation plays just as important a role
in polynomial rings. A general study will therefore be made of this in Chapter
VI ; this study will be applied in Chapter VII to determining the structure of
modules over certain particularly simple rings and in particular to the theory
of "elementary divisors".

Chapters VIII and IX are devoted to more particular theories, but which
have many applications in Analysis: on the one hand, the theory of semisimple
modules and rings, closely related to that of linear representations of groups', on the
other, the theory of quadratic forms and Hermitian forms, with the study of the
groups associated with them. Finally, the elementary geometries (affine, projective,
euclidean, etc.) are studied in Chapters II, VI and IX from a purely algebraic
point of view : here there is little more than a new language for expressing re-
sults of Algebra already obtained elsewhere, but it is a language which is
particularly well adapted to the later developments of Algebraic Geometry and
Differential Geometry, to which this chapter serves as an introduction.



xxm



CHAPTER I



Algebraic Structures



§ 1. LAWS OF COMPOSITION; ASSOCIATIVITY;
COMMUTATIVITY

1. LAWS OF COMPOSITION

Definition 1 . Let Fibea set. A mapping/ of E x E into E is called a law of composition
on E. The value f(x, y) off for an ordered pair (x, y) e E x £u called the composition
of x andy under this law. A set with a law of composition is called a magma.

The composition of* and y is usually denoted by writing x and y in a definite
order and separating them by a characteristic symbol of the law in question (a
symbol which it may be agreed to omit). Among the symbols most often used
are + and . , the usual convection being to omit the latter if desired; with these
symbols the composition of* andy is written respectively as x + y and x.y or xy.
A law denoted by the symbol + is usually called addition (the composition
x + y being called the sum of* and y) and we say that it is written additively; a
law denoted by the symbol . is usually called multiplication (the composition
x.y = xy being called the product of* and y) and we say that it is written multi-
plicatively. In the general arguments of paragraphs 1 to 3 of this chapter we shall
generally use the symbols T and ± to denote arbitrary laws of composition.

By an abuse of language, a mapping of a subset of E x E into E is sometimes
called a law of composition not everywhere defined on E.

Examples. (1) The mappings (X, Y) t-&gt; X U Y and (X, Y) i-&gt; X n Y are
laws of composition on the set of subsets of a set E.

(2) On the set N of natural numbers, addition, multiplication and ex-
ponentiation are laws of composition (the compositions ofxeN and y e N
under these laws being denoted respectively by x + y, xy or x .y and x y ) (Set
Theory, III, § 3, no. 4).

(3) Let E be a set; the mapping (X, Y) h- X o Y is a law of composition
on the set of subsets of E x E (Set Theory, II, § 3, no. 3, Definition 6) ; the
mapping (f, g) t-&gt;fo g is a law of composition on the set of mappings of
E into E (Set Theory, II, § 5, no. 2).

(4) Let E be a lattice (Set Theory, III, § 1, no. 1 1) ; if sup(*, y) denotes the
least upper bound of the set {x, y), the mapping (x, y) &gt;-&gt;■ sup(x, y) is a law of

1



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

composition on E. Similarly for the greatest lower bound inf (#, y) . Example
1 above is a particular case of this with ^3(E) ordered by inclusion.

(5) Let (Ej) j6l be a family of magmas. Let T* denote the law of composi-
tion on Ej. The mapping

((*)»(#)) ^(faTiyi))
is a law of composition on the product E = 1 1 E i} called the product of the

iel

laws T{. The set E with this law is called the product magma of the magmas E { .
In particular, if all the magmas Ej are equal to the same magma M, we ob-
tain the magma of mappings of I from M.

Let (x, y) M-A;Tybea law of composition on a set E. Given any two subsets
X, Y of E, X T Y (provided this notation does not lead to confusionf) will de-
note the set of elements x T y in E, where x e X, y e Y (in other words, the
image of X x Y under the mapping (x, y) ■-&gt; x T y).

If a e E we usually write a T Y instead of {a} T Y and X.T a instead of
X T {a}. The mapping (X, Y) t-&gt; X T Y is a law of composition on the set of
subsets of E.

Definition 2. Let E be a magma and T denote its law of composition. The law of
composition (x,y) t~&gt; y T x on E is called the opposite of the above. The set E with this
law is called the opposite magma of E.

Let E and E' be two magmas; we shall denote their laws by the same symbol
T. Conforming with the general definitions (Set Theory, IV, § 1, no. 5), a bijec-
tive mapping/ of E onto E' such that

(1) /(*Ty)=/(*)T/(y)

for every ordered pair (x, y) e E x E is called an isomorphism ofE onto E'. E and
E' are said to be isomorphic if there exists an isomorphism of E onto E'.
More generally:

Definition 3. A mapping f of *E into E' such that relation (1) holds for every ordered
pair (x, y) e E x Ew called a homomorphism, or morphism, ofE into E'; j/"E = E',
fis called an endomorphism ofE.

The identity mapping of a magma E is a homomorphism, the composition of
two homomorphism is a homomorphism.



f The following is an example where this principle would lead to confusion and
should therefore not be used. Suppose that the law of composition in question is the
law (A, B) i-»- A U B between subsets of a set E ; a law of composition

(St, 93) h^ F{% 93)
is derived between subsets of $3(E), F(Sl, 93) being the set ofAuB with A e St,
B e 93; but F(St, 93) should not be denoted by St U 93, as this notation already has a
different meaning (the union of St and 93 considered as subsets of ^3(E)).



COMPOSITION OF AN ORDERED SEQUENCE OF ELEMENTS §1.2

For a mapping / of E into E' to be an isomorphism, it is necessary and

-l
sufficient that it be a bijective homomorphism and / is then an isomorphism of

E' onto E.

2. COMPOSITION OF AN ORDERED SEQUENCE OF ELEMENTS

Recall that &amp; family of elements of a set E is a mapping ih-x, of a set I
(called an indexing set) into E; a family (* t ) teI is called finite if the indexing set
isfinite.

A finite family (# t ) t6l of elements of E whose indexing set I is totally ordered
is called an ordered sequence of elements of E.

In particular, every finite sequence (#i)f 6H , where H is a finite subset of the
set N of natural numbers, can be considered as an ordered sequence if H is given
the order relation induced by the relation m &lt; n between natural numbers.

Two ordered sequences (x^) iel and {y^^es. are called similar if there exists an
ordered set isomorphism § of I onto K such that y m -) = x t for all i e I.

Every ordered sequence (# a ) a6 A i s similar to a suitable finite sequence. For
there exists an increasing bijection of A onto an interval [0, n] of N.

Definition 4. Let (x a ) aeA be an ordered sequence of elements in a magma E whose
indexing set A is non-empty. The composition (under the law t) of the ordered sequence
( x a)aeA) denoted by T x a) is the element ofE defined by induction on the number of

aeA

elements in A as follows:

(1) if A = {(3} then T * a = * B ;

aeA

(2) if A has p &gt; 1 elements, (3 is the least element of A and A' = A — {(3}, then
T *« = * B T ( T * a )

aeA \a 6 A / •

It follows immediately (by induction on the number of elements in the in-
dexing sets) that the compositions of two similar ordered sequences are equal;
in particular, the composition of any ordered sequence is equal to the composi-
tion of a finite sequence. If A = {X, [x, v} has three elements (X &lt; [x &lt; v) the
composition T # a is x K T (x^ T # v ).

Remark. Note that there is a certain arbitrariness about the definition of the
composition of an ordered sequence; the induction we introduced proceeds
"from right to left". If we proceeded "from left to right", the composition of
the above ordered sequence (x K , x^, # v ) would be (#*, T x^) T x v .

As a matter of notation, the composition of an ordered sequence (# a ) ae A is
written _L for a law denoted by ± ; for a law written additively it is usually

denoted by 2-, x a and called the sum of the ordered sequence (Ar a ) aeA (the # a
being called the terms of the sum) ; for a law written multiplicatively it is usually



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

denoted by 1 1 x K and called the product of the ordered sequence (# a ) (the x a

ae A

being called the factors of the product) .f

When there is no possible confusion over the indexing set (nor over its
ordering) it is often dispensed with in the notation for the composition of an
ordered sequence and we then write, for example for a law written additively,

2L, x a instead of 2* # a ; similarly for the other notations.

a ae A

For a law denoted by T the composition of a sequence (x t ) with indexing set a

Q

non-empty interval (/&gt;, q) of N is denoted by T * ( or T ^; similarly for laws

denoted by other symbols.

Let E and F be two magmas whose laws of composition are denoted by T
and fa. homomorphism of E into F. For every ordered sequence (# a ) a6A of
elements of E

(2) /( T ) = T /(* a ).

\a e A/ a e A
3. ASSOCIATIVE LAWS

Definition 5. A law of composition (x,y) &gt;-&gt; x T y on a set E is called associative if,
for all elements x, y, z in E,

(xTy)T z = xT (yT z).
A magma whose law is associative is called an associative magma.
The opposite law of an associative law is associative.

Examples. (1) Addition and multiplication of natural numbers are associative
laws of composition on N (Set Theory, III, § 3, no. 3, Corollary to Proposition 5)
(2) The laws cited in Examples (1), (3) and (4) of no. 1 are associative.

Theorem 1 (Associativity theorem). Let E be an associative magma whose law is
denoted by T. Let A be a totally ordered non-empty finite set, which is the union of an
ordered sequence of non-empty subsets (B|) {eI such that the relations a e B J} (3 g B^,
i &lt; j imply a &lt; P; let (# a ) ae A be an ordered sequence of elements in E with A as index-
ing set. Then

(3) T^=T(T * a )

v ' aeA iel VxeBj /

f The use of this terminology and the notation 1 1 # a must be avoided if there is

(X 6 A

any risk of confusion with the product of the sets x a defined in the theory of sets {Set
Theory, II, § 5, no. 3). However, if the x a are cardinals and addition (resp. multipli-
cation) is the cardinal sum (resp. the cardinal product), the cardinal denoted by

Z* x a (resp. 1 1 # a ) in the above notation is the cardinal sum (resp. cardinal pro-

ae A V aeA /

duct) of the family (* a )aeA (Set Theory, III, § 3, no. 3).



ASSOCIATIVE LAWS § 1.3

We prove the theorem by induction on the cardinal n of A. Let p be the
cardinal of I and h its least element; let J = I — {h}. If rc = 1, as the B, are non-
empty, of necessity/* = 1 and the theorem is obvious. Otherwise, assuming the
theorem holds for an indexing set with at most n — 1 elements, we distinguish
two cases:

(a) B h has a single element (3. Let C = U B ( . The left-hand side of (3) is
equal, by definition, to # 3 T ( T # a ) ; the right-hand side is equal, by defini-
tion, to

*» T (,7,G») :

the result follows from the fact that the theorem is assumed true for C and

(b) Otherwise, let (3 be the least element of A (and hence of B ft ) ; let
A' = A - {(3} and let B,' = A' n B, for i e I ; then B,' = B, for i e J. The set A'
has n — 1 elements and the conditions of the theorem hold for A' and its sub-
sets B,'; hence by hypothesis:

T *« = (T *.)t(T(T Xo \).

eeeA' " VoceB'h / VJeJVaeBj //

Forming the composition of # 3 with each side, we have on the left-hand side
side, by definition, T * a and on the right-hand side, using the associativity,

(*° T LV°))Hia*«))

which is equal, by Definition 3, to the right-hand side of formula (3).

For an associative law denoted by T the composition T x t of a sequence
( x i)iei P ,q] is also denoted (since no confusion can arise) by

XpT---T*,.
A particular case of Theorem 1 is the formula

*oT*iT---T^= (* T* 1 T---T #„_i) T x n .

Consider an ordered sequence of n terms all of whose terms are equal to the

same element x e E. The composition of this sequence is denoted by T x for a

law denoted by T, ± x for a law denoted by ±. For a law written multiplica-
tively the composition is denoted by x n and called the n-th power of*. For a law
written additively the composition is usually denoted by nx. The associativity



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

theorem applied to an ordered sequence all of whose terms are equal gives the
equation

ni + ti2 + '-' + n p /ni \ (n^ \ (n p \

T x = \T x) T \T x) T • • • T \T x).

In particular, if p = 2,

m+n l m \ I n \

(4) T x = \T x) T \T x)

and if n x = n 2 = • • • = n p = m,

pro p (m \

(5) T x = T It x).

If X is a subset of E, we sometimes denote, in conformity with the above nota-
tion, by T X the set Xj T X 2 T • • • T X„, where

Xi = X 2 = • • • = X p = X;

it is thus the set of all compositions x x T x 2 T • • • T x p with x x e X, x 2 e X, . . . ,

x p eX.

p
It is important not to confuse this set with the set of T x, where x runs

through X.

4. STABLE SUBSETS. INDUCED LAWS

Definition 6. A subset A of a set E is called stable under the law of composition T on E
if the composition of two elements of A belongs to A. The mapping (x,y) t-+ x T y of
A x A into A is then called the law induced on A by the law T. The set A with the law
induced by T is called a submagma of E.

In other words, for A to be stable under a law T it is necessary and sufficient
that A T A c= A. A stable subset of E and the corresponding submagma are
often identified.

The intersection of a family of stable subsets of E is stable; in particular there
exists a smallest stable subset A of E containing a given subset X; it is said to
be generated by X and X is called a generating system of A or a generating set of A.
The corresponding submagma is also said to be generated by X.

Proposition 1. Let E and F be two magmas and fa homomorphism ofE into F.

(i) The image under f of a stable subset of E is a stable subset ofF.

(ii) The inverse image under f of a stable subset F is a stable subset ofE.

(iii) Let~Xbea subset ofE. The image underfofthe stable subset ofE generated by X
is the stable subset ofE generated byf(X).

(iv) Ifg is a second homomorphism of E from F the set of elements xofE such that
f{x) = g(x) is a stable subset ofE.



PERMUTABLE ELEMENTS. COMMUTATIVE LAWS § 1.5

Assertions (i), (ii) and (iv) are obvious; we prove (iii). Let X be the stable
subset of E generated by X and/(X) the stable subset of F generated by/(X).
By (i)/(X) c/(X) and by (ii) X c f(f{X)), whence/(X) &lt;=/(X).

Proposition 2. Let E be an associative magma and X a subset ofE. Let X' be the set
of x x T x 2 T • • • T x n , where n ^ 1 and where * { e X for 1 ^ i ^ n. The stable
subset generated by X is equal to X'.

It follows immediately by induction on n that the composition of an ordered
sequence of n terms belonging to X belongs to the stable subset generated by X;
it is therefore sufficient to verify that X' is stable. Now if u and v are elements of
X' they are of the form u = x T x x T • • • T x n _ ly v = x n T x n+1 T ■ • • T x n + p
with x t e Xfor ^ i ^ n + p; then (Theorem 1) u T v = x T x x T • • • T x n+p
belongs to X'.

Examples. (1) In the set N of natural numbers the stable subset under addi-
tion generated by {1} is the set of integers &gt; 1 ; under multiplication the set
{1} is stable.

(2) Given a law T on a set E, for a subset {h} consisting of a single element
to be stable under the law T it is necessary and sufficient that h T h = h; h
is then said to be idempotent. For example, every element of a lattice is idem-
potent for each of the laws sup and inf.

(3) For an associative law T on a set E the stable subset generated by a

set {a} consisting of a single element is the set of elements T a, where n runs
through the set of integers &gt; 0.

5. PERMUTABLE ELEMENTS. COMMUTATIVE LAWS

Definition 7. Let E be a magma whose law is denoted by T. Two elements x andy of
E are said to commute {or to be permutable) ify T x = x T y.

Definition 8. A law of composition on a set E is called commutative if any two
elements qfE commute under this law. A magma whose law of composition is commutative
is called a commutative magma.

A commutative law is equal to its opposite.

Examples. ( 1 ) Addition and multiplication of natural numbers are commu-
tative laws on N (Set Theory, III, § 3, no. 3, Corollary to Proposition 5).

(2) On a lattice the laws sup and inf are commutative; so, in particular,
are the laws U and O between subsets of a set E.

(3) Let E be a set of cardinal &gt; 1. The law (f, g) &gt;-^-f° g between map-
pings of E into E is not commutative as is seen by taking/" and g to be dis-
tinct constant mappings, but the identity mapping is permutable with every
mapping.



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(4) Let (x, y) h-&gt; x T y be a commutative law on E ; the law
(XJ)kXtY
between subsets of E is commutative.

Definition 9. Let E be a magma and X a subset ofE. The set of elements ofE which
commute with each of the elements ofXis called the centralizer ofX.

Let X and Y be two subsets of E and X' and Y' their respective centralizers.
IfX&lt;= Y, thenY' c X'.
Let (X,) i6l be a family of subsets of E and for all i e I let X,' be the centralizer

of Xj. The centralizer of U X ( is f I XJ.

Let X be a subset of E and X' the centralizer of X. The centralizer X" of X'
is called the bicentralizer of X. Then X &lt;= X". The centralizer X" of X" is equal
to X'. For X' is contained in its bicentralizer X"' and the relation XcX'
implies X" c X'.

Proposition 3. LetE be an associative magma whose law is denoted by T. If an ele-
ment xofE commutes with each of the elements y and zofE, it commutes with y T z.

For

XT (yT z) = (xTy)T z= (yT x)T z

= yT (x T z) =yT (z T x) = (y T z) T x.

Corollary. Let E be an associative magma. The centralizer of any subset of E is a
stable subset of E.

Definition 10. The centralizer of a magma E is called the centre ofE. An element
of the centre ofE is called a central element ofE.

If E is an associative magma its centre is a stable subset by the Corollary to
Proposition 3 and the law induced on its centre is commutative.

Proposition 4. Let E be an associative magma, X and Y two subsets ofE. If every
element ofX commutes with every element ofY every element of the stable subset generated
by X commutes with every element of the stable subset generated by Y.

Let X' and X" be the centralizer and bicentralizer of X. They are stable sub-
sets of E. Now X c X" and YcX' and hence X" (resp. X') contains the
stable subset ofE generated by X (resp. Y). As every element of X" commutes
with every element of X', the proposition follows.

m

Corollary l.Ifx andy are permutable under the associative law T so are T x and

n m n

T yfor all integers m &gt; andn &gt; 0; in particular T x and T x are permutable for all
x and all integers m &gt; and n &gt; 0.



PERMUTABLE ELEMENTS. COMMUTATIVE LAWS § 1 .5

Corollary 2. If all pairs of elements of a subset X are permutable under an associative
law T, the law induced by T on the stable subset generated by X is associative and
commutative.

Theorem 2 (Commutativity theorem). Let T be an associative law of composition
on E; let (# a ) aeA be a non-empty finite family of elements ofE which are pairwise per-
mutable; let B and C be two totally ordered sets with A as underlying set. Then

I # a = I Af a .
aeB aeC

Since the theorem is true if A has a single element, we argue by induction on
the number/* of elements in A. Let/&gt; be an integer &gt; 1 and suppose the theorem
is true when Card A &lt; p. We prove it for Card A = p. It may be assumed that
A is the interval (0,p — 1) in N; the composition of the ordered sequence

p-i
(*«)«eA defined by the natural order relation on A is T x u

Let A be given another total ordering and let h be the least element of A
under this ordering and A' the set of other elements of A (totally ordered by the
induced ordering). Suppose first &lt; h &lt; p — 1 and let P = {0, 1, . . . , h — 1}
and Q,= {A +1,. ..,/»— 1}; the theorem being assumed true for A', applying
the associativity theorem, we obtain (since A' = Pu Q.)



aeA' \1 = / \l = h+l I



whence, composing x h with both sides and repeatedly applying the commuta-
tivity and associativity of T :

T * a = x h T ( T * a ) = x h T I T x t ) T I T *,)

aeA VaeA' / \i = Q I \i = h + l 1

M-1 \ / P-l \ P-l

= T *Jt*»t T *, = T x u

\i = I \i = ft + l 7 1 =

which proves the theorem for this case. IfA = 0orA=/&gt;— 1, the same result
follows, but more simply, the terms arising from P or the terms arising from Q,
not appearing in the formulae.

Under a commutative associative law on a set E the composition of a finite
family (* a )aeA of elements of E is by definition the common value of the com-
position of all the ordered sequences obtained by totally ordering A in all possible
ways. This composition will still be denoted by T * a under a law denoted by

aeA

T ; similarly for other notations.

Theorem 3. Let T be an associative law on E and (# a ) ae A a non-empty finite family of
elements of E which are pairwise permutable. If A is a union of non-empty subsets
(B,) j6l which are pairwise disjoint, then

(6) T* a = T(T *.).

aeA ielxaeBj /



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

This follows from Theorem 2 if A and I are totally ordered so that the B 4
satisfy the conditions of Theorem 1 .

We single out two important special cases of this theorem :

1 . If (# aB ) (a&gt; B) 6 A x B is a finite family of permutable elements of an associative
magma whose indexing set is the product of two non-empty finite sets A, B (a
"double family"), then

(7) T # aB = T ( T # aB ) = T ( T x aB )

v ' (a, B)eAxB P aeAVPeB v ) 0eB\aeA P /

as follows from Theorem 3 by considering A x B as the union of the sets
{a} x B on the one hand and of the sets A x {(3} on the other.

For example, if B has n elements and for each a e A all the # aB have the same
value x a&gt; then

(8) T(t*J = t(T * a ).

aeA v/ VaeA /

If B has two elements, we obtain the following results : let (x a ) a6 A , (# a ) as a De
two non-empty families of elements of E. If the x a and the y B are pairwise
permutable, then

(9) T *« T y« = ( T * a )T ( T yX

aeA VaeA/ VaeA/

Because of formula (7) the composition of a double sequence (%) whose
indexing set is the product of two intervals (/&gt;, q\ and {r, s) in N is often de-
noted for a commutative associative law written additively by

g S s q

2L, 2* x,t or 2L .2, Xii
and similarly for laws denoted by other symbols.

2. Let n be an integer &gt; and let A be the set of ordered pairs of integers
(i,j) such that &lt; i ^ n, ^ j ' ^ n and i &lt;j; the composition of a family
(*« ) (i.fleA (under a commutative associative law) is also denoted by T x i}
(or simply T x l} , if no confusion arises) ; Theorem 3 here gives the formulae

n-l/ n \ n Ij-X \

(10) T xu = T IT xJ = T I T xX.

There are analogous formulae to (7) for a family whose indexing set is the
product of more than two sets and analogous formulae to (10) for a family whose
indexing set is the set S p of strictly increasing sequences (f fc ) 1&lt;fc&lt;p of/&gt; integers such
that ^ i k &lt; n (p &lt; n + 1) : in the latter case the composition of the family

(*»iia...0«i *p&gt;es p is denoted by

T x ill2 ip , or simply T ^ li2 ...v

10



QUOTIENT LAWS § 1.6

Proposition 5. Let E and F be magmas whose laws are denoted by T and let fond g be
homomorphisms ofE into F. Let/T g be the mapping x »-&gt;/(#) T g(x) o/E into F. IfF
is associative and commutative, J T g is a homomorphism.

For all elements x and y of E :

(/T g)(x T y) = /(* T y) T g(* T y) =/(*) T/(y) T g(*) T g{y)

= /(*) T *(*) T/(y) T g(y) = ((/T *)(*)) T ((/t *)(y)).

6. QUOTIENT LAWS

Definition 1 1 . Let Ebea set. A law of composition T and an equivalence relation R on
E are said to be compatible if the relations x — x' (mod R) andy — y' (mod R) {for
x &gt; x '&gt; y&gt; y' e E) tm/% at T y = *' T y' (mod R) ; ^ law of composition on the
quotient set E/R which maps the equivalence classes of x andy to the equivalence class of
xT y is called the quotient law of the law T with respect to R. The set E/R with the
quotient law is called the quotient magma of E with respect to R.

To say that an equivalence relation R on E is compatible with the internal
law of composition/: E x E -» E on E means that the mapping/is compatible
(in the sense of Set Theory, II, § 6, no. 5) with the product equivalence relation
R x R on E x E and the equivalence relation R on E. (Set Theory, II, § 6,
no. 8). This also means that the graph of R is a submagma of E x E.

If the law T is associative (resp. commutative) so is the quotient law (more
briefly we say that associativity, or commutativity, is preserved when passing to the
quotient).

The canonical mapping from the magma E to the magma E/R is a homo-
morphism.

For a mapping g of E/R into a magma F to be a homomorphism it is neces-
sary and sufficient that the composition of g with the canonical mapping of E
onto E/R be a homomorphism.

The two following propositions are immediate from the definitions:

Proposition 6. Let E and F be two magmas and fa homomorphism of E into F. Let
K\x, y\ denote the relation f{x) = f(y) between elements x, y of E. Then R is an
equivalence relation on E compatible with the law on E and the mapping ofE/K ontof(E)
derived from f bypassing to the quotient is an isomorphism of the quotient magma E/R onto
the submagma /(E) ofF.

Proposition 7. Let E be a magma and R an equivalence relation on E compatible with
the law on E. For an equivalence relation S on E/R to be compatible with the quotient law
it is necessary and sufficient that S be of the form T/R where T is an equivalence relation
on E implied by R and compatible with the law on E. The canonical mapping ofEjT onto
(E/R) /(T/R) (Set Theory, II, § 6, no. 7) is then a magma isomorphism.

Proposition 8. Let E be a magma, A a stable subset ofE and R an equivalence rela-
tion on E compatible with the law on E. The saturation Bo/A with respect to R (Set

11



ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES



Theory, II, § 6, no. 5) is a stable subset. The equivalence relations R A and R B induced
by R on A and B respectively are compatible with the induced laws and the mapping
derived from the canonical injection of A into B by passing to the quotients is a magma
isomorphism of A/K A onto B/R B .

Let T denote the law on E. If* and y are two elements of B there exist two
elements x' and y' of A such that x = x' (mod R) and y = y' (mod R) ; then
x T y = x' T y' (mod R) and x' T y' e A, whence * T y e B. Thus B is a stable
subset of E and the other assertions are obvious.

Let M be a magma and ((««, 0)«ei a family of elements of M x M. Con-
sider all the equivalence relations S on M which are compatible with the law on
M and such that u a = v a (mod S) for all a e I. The intersection of the graphs
of these relations is the graph of an equivalence relation R which is compatible
with the law on M and such that u x = v a (mod R). Hence R is the finest (Set
Theory, III, § 1, nos. 3 and 7) equivalence relation with these two properties. It
is called the equivalence relation compatible with the law on M generated by the

("«&gt; v a ).

Proposition 9. Preserving the above notation, letf be a homomorphism of M into a
magma such thatf^) =f(v a )for all a e I. Then f is compatible with R.

Let T be the equivalence relation associated with/. Then u a = e&gt; a (mod T)
for all a g 1 and T is compatible with the law on M, hence T is coarser than
R; this proves the proposition.

§ 2. IDENTITY ELEMENT; CANCELLABLE
ELEMENTS; INVERTIBLE ELEMENTS

1. IDENTITY ELEMENT

Definition 1. Under a law of composition T on a set E an element eofEis called an
identity element if, for all x e E, e T x = x T e = x.

There exists at most one identity element under a given law T, for if e and e'
are identity elements then e = e~X e' = e' . hxv identity element is permutable
with every element: it is a central element.

Definition 2. A magma with an identity element is called a unital magma. IfE, E' are
unital magmas, a homomorphism of the magma E into the magma E' which maps the
identity element of E to the identity element of E' is called a unital homomorphism (or
morphism) ofE into E'. An associative unital magma is called a monoid.

If E, E' are monoids, a unital morphism of E into E' is called a monoid
homomorphism or a monoid morphism of E into E'.

12



IDENTITY ELEMENT § 2.1

Examples. ( 1 ) In the set N of natural numbers is an identity element under
addition and 1 is an identity element under multiplication. Each of these two
laws gives N a commutative monoid structure (Set Theory, III, § 3, no. 3) .

(2) In the set of subsets of a set E, is an identity element under the law
U and E under the law O. More generally, in a lattice the least element, if it
exists, is identity element under the law sup; conversely, if there exists an
identity element under this law it is the least element of the set. Similarly for
the greatest element and the law inf.

(3) The set N has no identity element under the law (#, y) ■-»• x y . Under
the law (XJ)h-XoY between subsets of E x E the diagonal A is the
identity element. Under the law (/, g) h-&gt;/o g between mappings of E into
E the identity mapping of E onto E is the identity element.

(4) Let E be a magma and R an equivalence relation on E compatible with
the law on E (§ 1, no. 6). If e is an identity element of E the canonical image
of e in E/R is an identity element of the magma E/R.

The identity element of a unital magma is a unital homomorphism; the
composition of two unital homomorphisms is also one. For a mapping to be a
unital magma isomorphism it is necessary and sufficient that it be a bijective
unital homomorphism and the inverse mapping is then a unital homomorphism.
Let E and E' be unital magmas and e' the identity element of E'; the constant
mapping of E into E' mapping E to e' is a unital homomorphism, called a
trivial homomorphism.

The product of a family of unital magmas (resp. monoids) is a unital magma
(resp. monoid).

Every quotient magma of a unital magma (resp. monoid) is a unital magma
(resp. monoid).

Let E be a unital magma and e its identity element. A submagma A of E such
that e e A is called a unital submagma of E. Clearly e is the identity element of the
magma A. Every intersection of unital submagmas of E is a unital submagma
of E. If X is a subset of E then there exists a smallest unital submagma of E
containing X; it is called the unital submagma o/E generated by X; it is equal to
{&lt;?} if X is empty. If E is a monoid, a unital submagma of E is called a sub-
monoid of E.

If F is a magma without identity element a submagma of F may possess an
identity element. For example, if F is associative and h is an idempotent
element of F (I, § 1, no. 4), the set of h T x T h, where x runs through F, is a
submagma of F with h as identity element.

If E is a magma with identity element e, a submagma A of E such that
e $ A may still possess an identity element.

Definition 3. Let E be a unital magma. The identity element o/Eis called the com-
position of the empty family of elements ofE.

13



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

If (* a )&lt;xe0 is tne empty family of elements of E its composition e is also de-
noted by T # a . For example, we write

CC60

T x, = e

when p &lt; q (/&gt;, $r e N). Similarly we write T x = * for arbitrary x. With these
definitions Theorems 1 and 3 o/"§ 1 remain true if the hypothesis that the sets A and Bj are

m+n (m \ T (n \

non-empty is suppressed. Similarly the formulae T x = \T x) \T x) and

X x — T \T x) are then true for m ^ 0, n ^ 0.

Let E be a unital magma whose law is denoted by T and e its identity ele-
ment. The support of a family (*i) ieI of elements of E is the set of indices i e I
such that x { ^ e. Let (*0iei be a famn y of elements of E with finite support. We
shall define the composition T x { in the two following cases:

(a) the set I is totally ordered ;

(b) E is associative and the x t are pairwise permutable.

In these two cases let S be the support of the family (x t ). If J is a finite subset
of I containing S, then T x, = T x { , as is seen by induction on the number of
elements in J, applying Theorem 1 of § 1 in case (a) and Theorem 3 of § 1 in
case (b). Let T x. denote the common value of the compositions T x K for all

v ' iel »eJ

finite subsets of I containing S. When I is the interval (/&gt;, -+{ of N, we also
00

write T x t .
i = p

With these definitions and notation, Theorems 1 and 3 of § 1 and the remarks
following Theorem 3 extend to families with finite support.

The identity element of a law written additively is usually denoted by and
called zero or the null element (or sometimes the origin). Under a law written
multiplicatively it is usually denoted by 1 and called the unit element (or unit).

2. CANCELLABLE ELEMENTS

Definition 4. Given a law of composition T on a set E, the mapping x »-&gt; a T x (resp.
x ,_&gt; x y a ) qfE into itself is called left translation (resp. right translation) by an
element a e E.

On passing to the opposite law, left translations become right translations and
conversely.

Let Ya&gt; S a (or y{a), h(a)) denote the left and right translations by a e E; then

Y (*) = a T x, S a {x) = XT a.
14



INVERTIBLE ELEMENTS § 2.3

Proposition 1. If the law t is associative, then for all xeE andy e E

Yxjv = Y* ° Yy&gt; &amp;xtv = 8 y ° 8*.

For all z £ E :

Yxtv(z) = (xTy)T z = xt (yT z) = y x (y y (z))
B XJy (z) = z T (* T y) = (z T x) T y = 8 y (8 &lt; (z))

In other words, the mapping x i-* y* is a homomorphism from the magma
E to the set E E of mappings of E into itself with the law (/, g) h-»-/o g; the
mapping x i-&gt; 8* is a homomorphism of E into the set E E with the opposite
law. If E is a monoid, these homomorphisms are unital.

Definition 5. An element a of a magma E is called left (resp. right) cancellable (or
regular) if left (resp. right) translation by a is infective. A left and right cancellable
element is called a cancellable (or regular) element.

In other words, for a to be cancellable under the law T, it is necessary and
sufficient that each of the relations aT x = aT y, x T a = y T a imply x = y
(it is said that "a can be cancelled' ' from each of these equalities) . If there exists
an identity element e under the law T, it is cancellable under this law: the
translations y e and 8 e are then the identity mapping of E onto itself.

Examples. (1) Every natural number is cancellable under addition; every
natural number ^ is cancellable under multiplication.

(2) In a lattice there can be no cancellable element under the law sup
other than the identity element (least element) if it exists; similarly for inf.
In particular, in the set of subsets of a set E, is the only cancellable element
under the law U and E the only cancellable element under the law n.

Proposition 2. The set of cancellable (resp. left cancellable, resp. right cancellable)
elements of an associative magma is a submagma.

\iy x and y y are injective so is y XTy = y x o y y (Proposition 1). Similarly for

°xTy

3. INVERTIBLE ELEMENTS

Definition 6. Let E be a unital magma, T its law of composition, e its identity element
and x and x' two elements of E. x' is called a left inverse (resp. right inverse, resp.
inverse) of x if x' T x = e (resp. x T x' = e, resp. x' T x = x T x' — e).

An element x ofE is called left invertible (resp. right invertible, resp. invertible)
if it has a left inverse (resp. right inverse, resp. inverse).

A monoid all of whose elements are invertible is called a group.

15



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Symmetric and symmetrizable are sometimes used instead of inverse and in-
vertible. When the law on E is written additively, we generally say negative
instead of inverse.

Examples. (1) An identity element is its own inverse.

(2) In the set of mappings of E into E an element /is left invertible (resp.
right invertible) if/ is a surjection (resp. injection). The left inverses (resp.
right inverses) are then the retractions (resp. sections) associated with/ (Set
Theory, II, § 3, no. 8, Definition 11). For/ to be invertible it is necessary and
sufficient that/ be a bijection. Its unique inverse is then the inverse bijection
of/.

Let E and F be two unital magmas and /a unital homomorphism of E into
F. If *' is the inverse of* in E,/(*') is the inverse of/(*) in F. Hence, if* is an
invertible element of E,/(*) is an invertible element of F.

In particular, if R is an equivalence relation compatible with the law on a
unital magma E, the canonical image of an invertible element of E is invertible
in E/R.

Proposition 3. Let E be a monoid and x an element ofE.

(i) For x to be left (resp. right) invertible it is necessary and sufficient that the right
(resp. left) translation by x be surjective.

(ii) For x to be invertible it is necessary and sufficient that it be left and right invertible.
In that case x has a unique inverse, which is also its unique left (resp. right) inverse.

If*' is a left inverse of* then (Proposition 1)

8* ° *&gt;*' = &amp;x'tx = 8 e = Id E

and 8* is surjective. Conversely, if 8* is surjective, there exists an element *' of E
such that &amp;*(*') = e and *' is the left inverse of *. The other assertions of (i)
follow similarly.

If*' (resp. *") is a left (resp. right) inverse of*, then

x ' = *' J e = *' T (* T *") = (*' T *) T *" = e T *" = *",
whence (ii).

Remark. Let E be a monoid and * an element of E. If* is left invertible it is left
cancellable; for, if*' is a left inverse of*, then

Y*°Y* = Y*'t* = Ye = Id E
and y x is injective. In particular, if* is left invertible, the left and right transla-
tions by * are bijective. Conversely, suppose that y x is bijective; there exists
x' eE such that **' = y*(*') = e '&gt; then Y*(*'*) = (**') x = * = Y*W and
hence *'* = e, so that * is invertible. We see similarly that if 8* is bijective, * is
invertible.

16



MONOID OF FRACTIONS OF A COMMUTATIVE MONOID § 2.4

Proposition 4. Let E be a monoid and x andy invertible elements ofE with inverses x'
andy' respectively. Then y' T x' is the inverse qfxTy.

This follows from the relation

(y' T x')T (xjy) =y'T (x'T x)Ty =y'Ty = e

and the analogous calculations for (xT y) T (y' T x') .

Corollary 1 . Let E be a monoid; if each of the elements x a of an ordered sequence

(x a )aeA°f elements of E has an inverse x' a , the composition T x a has inverse T x'„,

oceA oceA'

where A' is the totally ordered set derived from A by replacing the order on A by the
opposite order.

This corollary follows from Proposition 4 by induction on the number of
elements in A.

In particular, if x and x' are inverses, T x and T x' are inverses for every
integer n ^ 0.

Corollary 2. In a monoid the set of invertible elements is stable.

Proposition 5. If in a monoid x and x' are inverses and x commutes with y, so does x'.

From x T y = y T x, we deduce x' T {x T y) T x' = x' T {y T x) T x' and
hence (x' T x) T {y T x') = (x' T y) T {x T x'), that is y T x' = x' T y.

Corollary 1. Let E be a monoid, X a subset ofE and X' the centralizer o/"X. The
inverse of every invertible element ofX' belongs to X'.

Corollary 2. In a monoid the inverse of a central invertible element is a central element.

4. MONOID OF FRACTIONS OF A COMMUTATIVE MONOID

In this no., e will denote the identity element of a monoid and x* the inverse of
an invertible element x of E.

Let E be a commutative monoid, S a subset of E and S' the submonoid of E
generated by S.

Lemma 1. In E x S' the relation K\x,y\ defined by:

"there exist a,beE and p, q, s e S' such that x = (a,p), y = (b, q) and
aqs = bps"

is an equivalence relation compatible with the law on the product monoid E x S\

It is immediate that R is reflexive and symmetric. Let x = (a,p),y = (b, q)
and z = (c, r) be elements ofE x S' such that R\x, y\ and R\y, z\ hold. Then
there exist two elements s and t of S' such that

aqs — bps, brt = cqt,

whence it follows that

ar{stq) = bpsrt = cp{stq)

17



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

and hence R\x, z\ holds, for stq belongs to S'. The relation R is therefore
transitive.

Further, let x = (a,p),y = {b, ?),*' = (a',p'),andy f = (£', q') be elements
of E x S' such that R\x, y\ and R\x', y'\ hold. There exist s and s' in S' such that

aqs = bps, a'q's' = b'p's\

whence it follows that (aa!) (qq') (ss f ) = {bb')(pp')(ss') and hence R\xx',yy'\ for
ss' e S'. The equivalence relation R is therefore compatible with the law of
composition on E x S\

The quotient magma (E x S')/R is a commutative monoid.

Definition 7. Let E be a commutative monoid, S a subset ofE andS' the submonoid
ofE generated by S. The quotient monoid (E x S')/R, where the equivalence relationR
is as described in Lemma 1, is denoted by E s and is called the monoid of fractions^ of
E associated with S (or with denominators in S) .

For aeE and p e S' the class of (a, p) modulo R is in general denoted by ajp
and called the fraction with numerator a and denominator p. Then by definition
{ajp) . {a'jp') = aa'lpp'. The fractions afp and a'jp' are equal if and only if there
exists s in S' with spa! — sp'a; if so, there exist a and a in S' with act = a' a' and
p a = p'a'. In particular, ajp = sajsp for a e E and j, p in S\ The identity ele-
ment of E s is the fraction e\e.

Let aje = e(a) for all a e E. The above shows that e is a homomorphism of
E into E s , called canonical. For all p e S', (p/e) . (e/p) = e\e and hence *//&gt; is the
inverse of e(p) = p/e; every element of e(S') is therefore invertible. Then
ajp = {aje) . (ejp), whence

(1) ajp = z(a)z{p)*

for a e E and/&gt; e S', the monoid E s is therefore generated by e(E) U s(S)*.

Proposition 6. The notation is that of Definition 7 and s denotes the canonical homo-
morphism ofE into Eg.

(i) Let a and b be in E; in order that e(a) = e(b), it is necessary and sufficient that
there exist s e S' with sa = sb.

(ii) For s to be injective it is necessary and sufficient that every element qfS be cancellable.

(iii) For z to be bijective it is necessary and sufficient that every element ofSbe in-
vertible.

Assertion (i) is clear and shows that e is injective if and only if every element
of S' is cancellable; but since the set of cancellable elements of E is a sub-
monoid of E (no. 2, Proposition 2), it amounts to the same to say that every
element of S is cancellable.



t It is also called monoid of differences if the law on E is written additively.
18



MONOID OF FRACTIONS OF A COMMUTATIVE MONOID § 2.4

If e is bijective every element of S is invertible, for s(S) is composed of in-
vertible elements of E s . Conversely, suppose every element of S is invertible;
then every element of S' is invertible (no. 3, Corollary 2 to Proposition 4) and
hence cancellable. Then e is injective by (ii) and a/p = s(a.p*) by (1), hence e
is surjective.

Theorem 1. Let E be a commutative monoid, S a subset gfE, E s the monoid of frac-
tions associated with S and e: E — &gt; E s the canonical homomorphism. Further let f be a
homomorphism ofE into a monoid F {not necessarily commutative) such that every element
off(S) is invertible in F. There exists one and only one homomorphism fqfE s into F
such that f = Jo e.

If/ is a homomorphism of E s into F such that/ = /° e, then

for a e E and p e S', whence the uniqueness off

Let g be the mapping of E x S' into F denned by g(a, p) = f(a) .f{p)*. We
show that g is a homomorphism of E x S' into F. First of all,

g(*,e)=f(e)f(e)*=e.

Let (a, p) and {a!, p') be two elements of E x S' ; as a' and p commute in E,
f{a') and f{p) commute in F, whence f \a') f(p)* =f(p)*f(a') by no. 3, Pro-
position 5. Moreover f(pp')* =f(p'p)* = (f(p')f(p))* = /(/&gt;)*/(/&gt;')* by no.
3, Proposition 4, whence

g(aa',pp') =f(aa')f(pp')* = f(a)f(a')f(p)*f(p')* = f(a)f(p)*f(a')f(p')*
= g{",P)g(*',P')-

We show that g is compatible with the equivalence relation R on E x S' :
if (a, p) and {a', p') are congruent mod. R, there exists ^eS' with spa' = sap',
whence f(s)f(p)f(a') =f(s)f(a)f(p'). Asf(s) is invertible, it follows that
f(P)f( a ') =f( a )f(P') and then by left multiplication by f(p)* and right
multiplication by f(p')*

g{"'&gt;P') =f{a')f{p')* =f{P)*fifi) =f{a)f{P)* = gifhp).

Hencethere exists a homomorphism/of E s into F such that/ '(a/p) = g(a, /&gt;),
whence/(e( fl )) =f{a\e) =f(a)f(e)* =f(a). Hence/o « =/.

Corollary. Zrf E anrf F fo too commutative monoids, S arca? T subsets of E ««&lt;/ F
respectively, f a homomorphism of E into F .mcA ^dtf /(S) c T cnc? s : E -»- E s ,
7] : F — &gt;■ F T M« canonical homomorphisms. There exists one and only one homomorphism
g: E s -&gt; F T such that g o s = tj of

The homomorphism tj o/ of E into F T maps every element of S to an in-
vertible element of F T .

19



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Remarks. (1) Theorem 1 can also be expressed by saying that (E s , e) is the
solution of the universal mapping problem for E, relative to monoids, monoid
homomorphisms and homomorphisms of E into monoids which map the ele-
ments of S to invertible elements (Set Theory, IV, § 3, no. 1). It follows (loc. cit.)
that every other solution of this problem is isomorphic in a unique way to
(E 8 ,e).

(2) For the existence of a solution to the above universal mapping problem
it is unnecessary to assume that the monoid E is commutative, as follows from
Set Theory, IV, § 3, no. 2 (cf. Exercise 17).

We mention two important special cases of monoids of fractions.

(a) Let E = E E . As the monoid E is generated by the set_s(E) U e(E)*,
which is composed of invertible elements, every element of E is invertible
(no. 3, Corollary 2 to Proposition 4). In other words, E is a commutative
group. Moreover, by Theorem 1 every homomorphism/ofE into a group G
can be uniquely factorized in the form/ — Jo e, where/: E -&gt;- G is a homo-
morphism. E is called the group of fractions ofE (or group of differences of E in the
case of additive notation) .

(b) Let O = E s , where 2 consists of the cancellable elements of E. By Pro-
position 6, (ii), the canonical homomorphism of E into O is injective; it will be
profitable to identify E with its image in O. Hence E is a submonoid of O,
every cancellable element of E has an inverse in O and every element of O is of
the form a\p = a.p* with a e E and p eS; then a\p = a'jp' if and only if
ap' = pa'. It is easily seen that the invertible elements of O are the fractions
a\p, where a and p are cancellable, and p/a is the inverse of a\p.

Now let S be a set of cancellable elements of E and S' be the submonoid of E
generated by S. If a\p and a'jp' are two elements of E s , then a\p = a'\p' if and
only if ap' = pa' (for sap' = spa' implies ap' = pa' for all s e S'). E s may there-
fore be identified with the submonoid of O generated by E U S*.

If every element of E is cancellable, then O = E and E is a submonoid of the
commutative group O. Conversely, if E is isomorphic to a submonoid of a
group, every element of E is cancellable.

5. APPLICATIONS: I. RATIONAL INTEGERS

Consider the commutative monoid N of natural numbers with law of composi-
tion addition; all the elements of N are cancellable under this law (Set Theory,
III, § 5, no. 2, Corollary 3). The group of differences of N is denoted by Z; its
elements are called the rational integers; its law is called addition of rational integers
and also denoted by + . The canonical homomorphism from N to Z is injective
and we shall identify each element of N with its image in Z. The elements of Z
are by definition the equivalence classes determined in N x N by the relation
between (m l5 nj and (m 2 , n 2 ) which is written m x + n 2 = m 2 + n x ; an element
m of N is identified with the class consisting of the elements (m + n,n), where

20



APPLICATIONS : I. RATIONAL INTEGERS § 2.5

n e N; it admits as negative in Z the class of elements (n, m + n). Every element
(p, q) of N x N may be written in the form (m + n, n) ifp ^ q or in the form
(n, m + n) if p ^ q; it follows that Z is the union ofN and the set of negatives of
the elements of N. The identity element is the only element of N whose
negative belongs to N.

For every natural number m, —m denotes the negative rational integer of m
and — N denotes the set of elements -mformeN. Then

Z=Nu (-N) and N n (-N) = {0}.

formeN,m = — m if and only if m = 0.
Let m and n be two natural numbers;

(a) if m ^ n, then m + ( — n) = p, where p is the element of N such that
m = n + p;

(b) if m ^ w, then m + ( — n) = —p, where p is the element of N such that

m + p = n;

(c) (-m) + (-n) = -(m + n).

Properties (b) and (c) follow from no. 3, Proposition 4; as Z = N U (— N),
addition in N and properties (a), (b) and (c) describe completely addition in Z.

More generally — # is used to denote the negative of an arbitrary rational
integer x; the composition x + (—y) is abbreviated to x — y (cf. no. 8).

The order relation &lt; between natural numbers is characterized by the
following property: m ^ n if and only if there exists an integer// e N such that
m + p = n (Set Theory, III, § 3, no. 6, Proposition 13 and § 5, no. 2, Proposition
2) . The relation^ — x e N between rational integers x and y is a total order rela-
tion on Z which extends the order relation ^ on N. For, for all x e Z,
x — # = 0eN;if# — #eN and z — y e N, then

z - x = (z - y) + (y - x) e N,

for N is stable under addition; i£y — x e N and x — y £ N, theny — x = 0, for
is the only element of N whose negative belongs to N; for arbitrary rational
integers x andy,y - x e N or x - y e N, for Z = N U ( -N) ; finally, if at andy
are natural numbers, then y — x e N if and only if there exists p e N such that
x + p = y. This order relation is also denoted by ^ .

Henceforth when Z is considered as an ordered set, it will always be, unless
otherwise mentioned, with the ordering that has just been defined, the natural
numbers are identified with the integers ^ 0; they are also called positive in-
tegers; the integers ^ 0, negatives of the positive integers, are called negative
integers; the integers &gt; (resp. &lt; 0) are called strictly positive (resp. strictly
negative) ; the set of integers &gt; is sometimes denoted by N*.

Let x, y and z be three rational integers; then x &lt; y if and only if

21



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

x + z ^ y + z. For x - y = (x + z) - (y + z). This property is expressed
by saying that the order relation on Z is invariant under translation.

6. APPLICATIONS: II. MULTIPLICATION OF RATIONAL INTEGERS

Lemma 2. Let E be a monoid and x an element o/E.

(i) There exists a unique homomorphism f of N into E with /(l) = x and

f(n) = t xfor all neN.

(ii) If x is invertible, there exists a unique homomorphism gofZ into E such that
g(\) = x and g coincides with f on N.

Writing /(n) = T x for all neN, the formulae

/m \ In \ m+n

T x = e and \T x) T \T x) = T *

(no. 1) express the fact that/ is a homomorphism of N into E and obviously
f(l) = x. Iff is a homomorphism of N into E such that/'(!) = x &gt; men
/ =/', by § 1, no. 4, Proposition 1, (iv).

Suppose now that x is invertible. By no. 3, Corollary 2 to Proposition 4,

f{n) = T x is invertible for every integer n &gt; 0. By construction, Z is the group
of differences of N and hence (no. 4, Theorem l)/extends uniquely to a homo-
morphism g of Z into E. If g' is a homomorphism of Z into E with £'(1) = x,
the restriction/' of g' to N is a homomorphism of N into E with/'(l) = x.
Hence/' = /, whence g' = g.

We shall apply Lemma 2 to the case where the monoid E is Z; for every
integer meZ there therefore exists an endomorphism/ m of Z characterized by
/ m (l) = m. If m is in N, the mapping n^mnofN into N is an endomorphism
of the magma N (Set Theory, III, § 3, no. 3, Corollary to Proposition 5) ; hence
f m (n) = mn for all m, n in N.

Multiplication on N can therefore be extended to multiplication on Z by the
formula mn =/„(«) for m, n in Z. We shall establish the formulae:

(2) xy = yx

(3) (xy)z = x(yz)

(4) x(y + z) = xy + xz

(5) (x +y)z = xz +yz

(6) 0.x = x.O =

(7) 1.x = x.l = x

(8) (-1).* = *.(-1) = -x

for *,y, z in Z. (*In other words, Z is a commutative ring.*) The formulae
x(y + z) = xy + xz and #.0 = express the fact that/* is an endomorphism

22



NOTATION § 2.8

of the additive monoid Z and/*(l) = x may be written x. 1 = x. The endo-
morphism/^ of y of Z maps 1 to xy and hence is equal tof xy , whence (3). Now
fx{~y) = —fx(y)&gt; tnat i s *(~~ y) = ~ x yi similarly, the endomorphism
yh&gt; — xy of Z maps 1 to — x, whence ( — x) .y = —xy and therefore

i-x)(-y) = -C*(-y)) = -(-*y) = *y-

For m, n in N, m« = nm (Set Theory, III, § 3, no. 3, Corollary to Proposition 5),
whence ( — m) .n = n( — m) and ( — m)( — ri) = ( — n)( — m); asZ =Nu (— N),
xy = yx for x,y in Z; and this formula means that (5) follows from (4) and
completes the proof of formula (6) to (8).

7. APPLICATIONS: m. GENERALIZED POWERS

Let E be a monoid with identity element e and law of composition denoted by
T. If* is invertible in E, letg x be the homomorphism of Z into E mapping 1 to

x. Let g x (n) = T x for all n e Z; by Lemma 2 this notation is compatible for
n e N with the notation introduced earlier. Then



(9) T



f n * = (t x) T (t x)



o



(10) T x = e

(11) Jx = x

m

for x invertible in E and m, n in Z. Further, ify = T x, the mapping n t-&gt; g x (mn)
of Z into E is a homomorphism mapping 1 to y, whence g x (mn) = g y (n), that
is



mn



n / m \

x = T \T x).



(12) T

-l l

As — 1 is the negative of 1 in Z, T* is the inverse of x = T x in E. If we write

-m m

n = —m in (9), it is seen that T x is the inverse of T x.

8. NOTATION

(a) As a general rule the law of a commutative monoid is written additively.
It is then a convention that — x denotes the negative of x. The notation
x + ( ~~y) i s abbreviated to x — y and similarly

# + y — z, x — y — z, x — y + z — t, etc. . . .

represent respectively

etc.



x+y+(-z), x + (-y) + (-2), * + (-y) + z + (-*),



23



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

n

For n e Z the notation T x is replaced by nx. Formulae (9) to (12) then become

(13) (m + n).x = m.x + n.x

(14) 0.x =

(15) l.x = x

(16) m.(n.x) = (mn).x

where m and n belong to N or even to Z if x admits a negative. Also in the latter
case the relation ( — 1) .x = — x holds. We also note the formula

(17) n.(x + y) = n.x + n.y.

(b) Let E be a monoid written multiplicatively. For n e Z the notation T x
is replaced by x 11 . We have the relations

x° = 1
X 1 — X

(x m ) n = x mn

and also (xy) n = x n y n if x a.ndy commute.

When x has an inverse, this is precisely x~ x . The notation - is also used in-

x
stead of # _1 . Finally, when the monoid E is commutative, - or x\y is also used

for xy' 1 .

§ 3. ACTIONS

1. ACTIONS

Definition 1 . Let Q. and E be two sets. A mapping of D. into the set E E of mappings
ofF, into itself is called an action of Q on E.

Let a i-&gt;y^ be an action of Q. on E. The mapping (a, x) &gt;-&gt;./J,(#) (resp.
(x, a) ^-f a (x)) is called the law of left (resp. right) action ofQ. on Ef associated with
the given action ofClonE. Given a mapping g of Q. x E (resp. E x Q) into E,
there exists one and only one action a &gt;-+f a of O on E such that the associated
law of left (resp. right) action is g (Set Theory, II, § 5, no. 2, Proposition 3).

In this chapter we shall say, for the sake of abbreviation, "law of action"



f Or sometimes the external law of composition on E with Q as operating set.
24



ACTIONS §3.1

instead of "law of left action". The element f a (x) of E (for aeO and * e E) is
sometimes called the transform of x under a or the composition of a and x. It is
often denoted by left (resp. right) multiplicative notation ol.x (resp. *.&lt;x), the
dot may be omitted; the composition of a and x is then called the product of a
and x (resp. x and a) . The exponential notation x a is also used. In the arguments
of the following paragraphs we shall generally use the notation a ± x. The ele-
ments of Q, are often called operators.

Examples. (1) Let E be an associative magma written multiplicatively. The
mapping which associates with a strictly positive integer n the mapping
x h-&gt; x n of E into itself is an action of N* on E. If E is a group, the mapping
which associates with a rational integer a the mapping x t-&gt; x a of E into E is
an action of Z on E.

(2) Let E be a magma with law denoted by T. The mapping which
associates with xeE the mapping A *-&gt; x T A of the set of subsets of E into
itself is an action of E on ^(E).

(3) Let E be a set. The identity mapping of E E is an action of E E on E,
called the canonical action. The corresponding law of action is the mapping
(/» *) &gt;-»•/(*) of E E x E into E.

(4) Let (Cl { ) ieI be a family of sets. For all i e I, let/: Cl t -&gt; E E be an action
of Cl l on E. Let CI be the sum of the Cl t (Set Theory, II, § 4, no. 8). The map-
ing/of CI onto E E , extending the /,, is an action of CI on E. This allows us
to reduce the study of a family of actions to that of a single action.

(5) Given an action of CI on E with law denoted by J., a subset S of CI and
a subset X of E, S j_ X denotes the set of a _|_ x with a e S and x e X; when
S consists of a single element a, we generally write a ± X instead of {a} j_ X.
The mapping which associates with ae CI the mapping X i-»- a _L X is an
action of CI on ^3(E), which is said to be derived from the given action by ex-
tension to the set of subsets.

(6) Let a i-*-/ a be an action of CI on E. Let g be a mapping of CI' into CI.
Then the mapping (3 ^&gt;f g ^ is an action of CI' on E.

(7) Let/: E x E — &gt; E be a law of composition on a set E. The mapping
y: x t-&gt; y* (resp. 8: x h&gt; S x ) (§ 2, no. 2) which associates with the element
x e E left (resp. right) translation by x is an action of E on itself; it is called
the left (resp. right) action of E on itself derived from the given law. When/is
commutative, these two actions coincide.

The law of left (resp. right) action associated with y is/ (resp. the opposite
law to/). The law of right (resp. left) action associated with 8 is/ (resp. the
opposite law to/).

Let Q, E, F be sets, a &gt;-&gt;/, an action of Q, on E and an-^an action of Q. on
F. An Cl-morphism ofE into F, or mapping ofE into F compatible with the action of Q,
is a mapping h of E into F such that

&amp;(*(*)) = KUx))

25



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

for all &lt;x e 0. and xeE. The composition of two Q-morphisms is an Q-mor-
phism.

Let Q, 3, E, F be sets, a y-&gt;f u an action of Q. on E, p •-&gt; gli an action of S on
F and &lt;j&gt; a mapping of Q into Q' . A §-morphism of E into F is a mapping h of E
into F such that

for all a e Q and «gE.

2. SUBSETS STABLE UNDER AN ACTION. INDUCED ACTION

Definition 2. -4 subset AofasetEis called stable under an action a •-&gt;/« ofQonE
iff n (A) c= A/or a// a £ £L ^4n element xo/Eis called invariant under an element a of

&amp; j/"/a(*) = *•

The intersection of a family of stable subsets of E under a given action is
stable. There therefore exists a smallest stable subset of E containing a given
subset X of E; it is said to be generated by X; it consists of the elements
(/«» °/«a ° • * ' °/«J (*)&gt; where * e X, w ^ 0, a f e O for all i.

Remark. Let E be a magma with law denoted by T . It should be noted that a
subset A of E which is stable under the left action on E on itself is not necessarily
stable under the right action of E on itself; a subset A of E stable under the left
(resp. right) action of E on itself is stable under the law on E but the converse
is not in general true. More precisely, A is stable under the law on E if and only
if A T A cr A whereas A is stable under the left (resp. right) action on E on
itself if and only if E T A c A (resp. A T E c A).

Example. Take the magma E to be the set N with multiplication. The set {1}
is stable under the internal law of N, but the stable subset under the action of
N on itself generated by {1} is the whole of N.

Definition 3. Let a ^f^ be an action of Q. on E and A a stable subset of E. The
mapping which associates with an element a e CI the restriction off a to A (considered as a
mapping of A into itself) is an action of Q. on A said to be induced by the given action.

3. QUOTIENT ACTION

Definition 4. Let a t-&gt;f a be an action of a set Q. on a set E. An equivalence relation R
on E is said to be compatible with the given action if, for all elements x andy cflL such
that x = y (mod R) and all aeO, f a (x) =f a (y) (mod R). The mapping which
associates with an element &lt;x.eQ,the mapping of E/K into itself derived from f^ bypassing
to the quotients is an action of Q. on E/R called the quotient of the action of Q. on E.

Let E be a magma and R an equivalence relation on E. R is said to be left
(resp. right) compatible with the law on E if it is compatible with the left (resp.

26



DISTRIBUTIVITY § 3.4

right) action of E on itself derived from the law on E. For R to be compatible
with the law on E it is necessary and sufficient that it be left and right compatible
with the law on E.

We leave to the reader the statement and proof of the analogues of Proposi-
tions 6, 7 and 8 of § 1, no. 6.

4. DISTRIBUTTVITY

Definition 5. Let E 1} . . . , E n and F be sets and u a mapping of E r x • • • x E n
into F. Let i'e(1,r). Suppose E t and F are given the structures of magmas, u is said to
be distributive relative to the index variable i if the partial mapping

x l l-&gt; u ( a l&gt; ■ ' '» a i-l&gt; x i&gt; a i + l&gt; • • •&gt; a n)

is a homomorphism ofE { into F for all fixed a f in Ej andj ^ i.

If T denotes the internal laws on E, and F, the distributivity of u is given by
the equations

(1) «(«!, . . ., «,_!, x t T x[, a i+1 , a n )

= u(a x&gt; . . .,«!_!, # i5 a i + 1 , . . ., a n ) T u(a x , . . ., a t _ l5 x' u a i+1 , ...,a n )

for i = 1, 2, . . ., n, a x e E 1} . . . , a x _ x e E,_ l5 x t e E i5 x[ e E u a i+1 e E i+lJ . . .,
a n e E n .

Example. Let E be a monoid (resp. group) written multiplicatively. The
mapping (n, x) w- * B of N x E (resp. Z x E) into E is distributive with
respect to the first variable by the equation x m + n = x m x n (with addition as
law on N). If E is commutative, this mapping is distributive with respect to
the second variable by the equation (xy) n = x n y n .

Proposition 1. Let E l5 E 2 , . . ., E n and F be commutative monoids written additively
and let u be a mapping ofE x x • • • x E n into F, which is distributive with respect to
all the variables. For i = 1, 2, . . ., n, let L f be a non-empty finite set and (x if ^),, ellt a

family of elements ofE x . Lety i = 2i, x { K for i = 1, 2, . . ., n. Then

(2) u(y u ...,y n ) =Z «(*i, a l5 • • • , *», oj

the sum being taken over all sequences a = (a l5 . . . , a^) belonging to L x x • • • x L n .

We argue by induction on n, the case n = 1 following from formula (2) of
§ 1, no. 2. From the same reference

(3) "(yi&gt;---»yn-l&gt;yn) = i "(#l&gt;---&gt;yn-l&gt;*n.&lt;x„)

27



ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES



for y n = Z *„. «„ and the mapping z h* u(y 1} . . . , y tt _ x , z) of E B into F is a
magma homomorphism. By the induction hypothesis applied to the distribu-
tive mappings (z l5 . . ., z n _i) •-*" u(z lt . . ., z n -i&gt; * Bp0 J from Ej. x • • • x E ft _!
toF,

(4) "(yi,- • .,y n - !»*»!,«,,) = „ £ uiXl.w-jXn-l.ah-xiXn.oJt

&lt;*i» . . . » &lt;*n — i

the sum being taken over the sequences (a l5 . . ., a^O belonging to
M = Li x • • • x L n _i. Now L x x • • • x L n = M x L n ; writing

^ai &lt;x„ = M (*l,aiJ • • • j ^n.ajs

we have

(5) ^w ^ai a„ = 4? L, ^ „ ta l «»-l.«n)

v ' ai a„ x otn \ai a n /

by formula (7) of § 1, no. 5. (2) follows immediately from (3), (4) and (5).

Remark. If u(a 1} . . . , a f _ l5 0, a i+li . . . , a n ) = for i = 1, 2, . . . , n and a, e E t
(j jki), then formula (2) remains true for families {x u J XeU of finite support.

A special case of Definition 5 is that where u is the law of action associated
with the action of a set Q on a magma E. If u is distributive with respect to the
second variable, it is also said that the action of Q, on the magma E is distribu-
tive. In other words :

Definition 6. An action a ■-&gt;/« of a set Q. on a magma E is said to be distributive
if, for all oceQ, the mapping f a is an endomorphism of the magma E.

If T denotes the law of the magma E and _L the law of action associated with
the action of Q. on E, the distributivity of the latter is then expressed by the
formula

(6) a.± (xT y) = (ol±x)t (oLLy) (for oce Hand x,y e E).

By an abuse of language, it is also said that the law X is distributive (or right
distributive) with respect to the law T.

Formula (2) of § 1, no. 2 shows that then, for every ordered sequence
(x K ) Keh of elements of E and every a e Q,

(7) a± (T Xj) = T (aj_x x )-

If an action a i-&gt;/ a is distributive and an equivalence relation R on E is
compatible with the law of composition of E and the action a n-&gt;/ a , the quotient
action on E/R is distributive.

When the law on E is written multiplicatively, we often use the exponential
notation x a for a law of action which is distributive with respect to this multipli-
cation, so that distributivity is expressed by the identity {xy) a = x*y*. If the law

28



DISTRIBUTIVITY OF ONE INTERNAL LAW WITH RESPECT TO ANOTHER § 3.5

on E is written additively, we often use left (resp. right) multiplicative notation
a.* (resp. *.a) for a law of action which is distributive with respect to this
addition, the distributivity being expressed by the identity

a (* + y) = ax + ay (resp. (x + y)a = xa + ya).

We may also consider the case where Q, has an internal law, denoted by T,
and the law of action is distributive with respect to the first variable, which
means that

(8) (a T (3) ± x = (a _L x) T (p JL x)

for all a, p e D. and x e E. Then, by formula (2) of § 1, no. 2

(9) ( T ctt) J_ x = T (a„ ± x)

UeL / X e L

for every ordered sequence (oc K ) Keh of elements of Q, and all x e E.

5. DISTRIBUTIVITY OF ONE INTERNAL LAW WITH RESPECT TO ANOTHER

Definition 7. Let T and j_ be two internal laws on a setE. The law ± is said to be
distributive with respect to the law T if

(10) xl(jTz) = (xlj()T(xlz)

(11) (xry)±z= {x±z)T {yJLz)

for all x, y, z in E.

Note that (10) and (11) are equivalent if the law ± is commutative. In
general, one of the laws is written additively and the other multiplicatively; if
multiplication is distributive with respect to addition, then :

(12) x.(y + z) — x.y + x.z

(13) (x + y).z = x.z + y.z

Examples. (1) In the set ^B(E) of subsets of a set E, each of the internal laws
n and U is distributive with respect to itself and the other. This follows from
formulae of the form

An(BuC) = (AnB)u(AnC)
A u (B n C) = (AuB)n(Au C).

(2) In Z (and more generally, in any totally ordered set) each of laws sup
and inf is distributive with respect to the other and with respect to itself.

(3) In Z (*and more generally in any ring*) multiplication is distributive
with respect to addition.

(4) In N addition and multiplication are distributive with respect to the
laws sup and inf.

29



ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES



§ 4. GROUPS AND GROUPS WITH OPERATORS



1. GROUPS

Recall the following definition (§ 2, no. 3, Definition 6).

Definition 1. A set with an associative law of composition, possessing an identity ele-
ment and under which every element is invertible, is called a group.

In other words, a group is a monoid (§ 2, no. 1, Definition 1) in which every
element is invertible. A law of composition on a set which determines a group
structure on it is called a group law. If G and H are two groups, a magma
homomorphism of G into H is also called a group homomorphism. Such a homo-
morphism/maps identity element to identity element; for, let e (resp. e') be the
identity element of G (resp. H) ; writing the group laws of G and H multipli-
catively,*.* = e, whence/ (e) .f(e) = f(e) and, multiplying by/ (e) ~ 1 ,f{e) =e'.
Hence/ is unital. It then follows from no. 3 of § 2 that/(* -1 ) =/(*) -1 for all
xeG.

Example. In any monoid E the set of invertible elements with the structure
induced by that on E is a group. In particular, the set of bijective mappings
of a set F onto itself (or set of permutations of F) is a group under the law
(/&gt; g) i ~ J&gt; f° g&gt; called the symmetric group of the set F and denoted by €&gt; T .

In this paragraph, unless otherwise indicated, the law of composition of a
group will always be written multiplicatively and e will denote the identity ele-
ment of such a group law.

A group G is called finite if the underlying set of G is finite; otherwise it is
called infinite', the cardinal of a group is called the order of the group.

If a law of composition on G determines a group structure on G, so does the
opposite law. The mapping of a group G onto itself which associates with each
x e G the inverse of x is an isomorphism of G onto the opposite group (§ 2, no. 3,
Proposition 4) .

Following our general conventions (Set Theory, II, § 3, no. 1), we shall
denote by A -1 the image of a subset A of G under the mapping x i-&gt; x' 1 .
But it is important to note that, in spite of the analogy of notation, A -1 is
definitely not the inverse element of A under the law of composition
(X, Y) I-5* XY between subsets of G (recall that XY is the set of xy with
xe~K, y eY): the identity element under this law is {«} and the only in-
vertible elements of ^(G) under this law are the sets A consisting of a single
element (such an A, moreover, certainly has inverse A"" 1 ). The identity

30



GROUPS WITH OPERATORS § 4.2

(AB) _1 = B~ 1 A _1 holds forAc G,Bc G.A is called a symmetric subset
of G if A = A -1 . For all A c G, A U A -1 , A n A -1 and AA -1 are sym-
metric.

2. GROUPS WITH OPERATORS

Definition 2. Let CI be a set. A group G together with an action of Q, on G which is
distributive with respect to the group law, is called a group with operators in Q.

In what follows x* will denote the composition of a e Q and x e G. Distri-
butivity is then expressed by the identity (xy) a = x^y".

In a group with operators G, each operator defines an endomorphism of the
underlying group structure; these endomorphisms will sometimes be called the
homotheties of the group with operators G.

A group with operators G is called commutative (or Abelian) if its group law is
commutative.

In what follows a group G will be identified with the group with operators in
obtained by giving G the unique action of on G. This allows us to consider
groups as special cases of groups with operators and to apply to them the defini-
tions and results relating to the latter which we shall state.

Example. In a commutative group G, written multiplicatively, (xy) n = x n y n
for all n e Z (§ 2, no. 8, equation (1)) ; the action «h&gt;(xi-&gt; x n ) of Z on G
therefore defines, together with the group law, the structure of a group with
operators on G.

Definition 3. Let G and G' be groups with operators in Q. A homomorphism of
groups with operators of G into G' is a homomorphism of the group G into the
group G' such that

/(*") = C/(*)) a

for all a e Q and all x eG.

An endomorphism of the group with operators G is an endomorphism of the
group G which is permutable with all the homotheties of G.

As two homotheties of a group with operators G are not necessarily per-
mutable, a homotkety of G is not in general an endomorphism of the group with
operators G.

The identity mapping of a group with operators is a homomorphism of
groups with operators; the composition of two homomorphisms of groups with
operators is also one. For a mapping to be an isomorphism of groups with
operators, it is necessary and sufficient that it be a bijective homomorphism of
groups with operators and the inverse mapping is then an isomorphism of
groups with operators.

31



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

More generally, let G (resp. G') be a group with operators in Q (resp. Q').
Let $ be a mapping of Q. into CI'. A §-homomorphism of G into G' is a homo-
morphism of the group G into the group G' such that

/(*«) = C/T*))* (a)

for all a 6" Q and all x e G.

In the rest of this paragraph we shall be given a set D. Unless otherwise
mentioned the groups with operators considered will admit Q as set of operators.

3. SUBGROUPS

Definition 4. Let G be a group with operators. A stable subgroup of G is a subset H of
G with the following properties :

(i) eeH;

(ii) x,y eH implies xy eH;

(iii) xeH implies x' 1 eH;

(iv) x e H and aeii imply /eH.

If H is a stable subgroup of G, the structure induced on H by the structure of
a group with operators on G is the structure of a group with operators and the
canonical injection of H into G is a homomorphism of groups with operators.

Let G be a group. A stable subgroup of G with the action of (no. 2), which
is a subset of G satisfying conditions (i), (ii), (iii) of Definition 4, is called a sub-
group of G. When we speak of a subgroup of a group of operators we shall always
mean a subgroup of the underlying group of G. A subgroup of a group with
operators G is not necessarily a stable subgroup of G.

Example (1). Let 2 be a species of structure (Set Theory, TV, § 1, no. 4) and S
a structure of species S on a set E (loc. tit.). The set of automorphisms of S is
a subgroup of E .

Proposition 1. Let G be a group with operators and H a subset ofG which is stable
under the homotheties ofG. The following conditions are equivalent:

(a) H is a stable subgroup ofG.

(b) H is non-empty and the relations x e H, y e H imply xy e H and x~ x eH.

(c) H is non-empty and the relations x e H, y e H imply xy ~ x e H.

(d) H is stable under the law on G and the law of composition induced on H by the
law of composition on G is a group law.

Clearly (a) implies (b). We show that (b) implies (a). It suffices to show that
H contains the identity element ofG. As the subset H is non-empty, let xeH.
Then r^H and e = xx~ x e H. Clearly (b) implies (c). We show that (c)
implies (b). First of all since H is non-empty it contains an element x. Hence

32



SUBGROUPS § 4.3

xx' 1 = e is an element of H. For every element x of H, a -1 = ex' 1 belongs to
H; hence the relations xeH, yeH imply x(y~ 1 )~ 1 — xy eH. Clearly (a)
implies (d). We show that (d) implies (a) : the canonical injection of H into G is
a group homomorphism; hence eeH and the relation x e H implies x' 1 e H
(no. 1).

Remarks. (1) Similarly it can be shown that condition (b) is equivalent to
the condition

(c') H 96 and the relations x e H and y eH imply y~ 1 x e H.

(2) For every subgroup H of G there are the following relations

(1) H.H = H and H" 1 = H.

ForH.H c HandH" 1 c Hby (b). As* e H,H.H =&gt; e.H = Hand taking
inverses transforms the inclusion H"" 1 c H into H &lt;= H -1 , whence
formulae (1).

If H is a stable subgroup of G and K is a stable subgroup of H, clearly K is a
stable subgroup of G.

The set {e} is the smallest stable subgroup of G. The intersection of a family
of stable subgroups of G is a stable subgroup. There is therefore a smallest
stable subgroup H of G containing a given subset X of G; it is called the stable
subgroup generated by X and X is called a generating system (or generating set) of H.

Proposition 2. Let X be a non-empty subset of a group with operators G and X the
stable subset under the action of Q. on G generated by X. The stable subgroup generated
by X is the stable subset under the law on G generated by the setY = X U X" x .

The latter subset Z is the set of compositions of finite sequences all of whose
terms are elements of X or inverse of elements of X: the inverse of such a com-
position is a composition of the same form (§ 2, no. 3, Corollary 1 to Propo-
sition 5) and Z is stable under the action of Q, as is seen by applying § 3,
no. 4, Proposition 1 to the homotheties of G, hence (Proposition 1) Z is a stable
subgroup of G. Conversely, every stable subgroup containing X obviously
contains Y and hence Z.

Corollary 1 . Let G be a group with operators and X a subset of G which is stable
under the action of Q. The subgroup generated by X and the stable subgroup generated by
X coincide.

Corollary 2. Let G be a group and X a subset of G consisting of pairwise permut-
able elements. The subgroup ofG generated byXis commutative.

The set Y = XuX" 1 consists of pairwise permutable elements (§ 2, no. 3,
Proposition 5) and the law induced on the stable subset generated by Y is
commutative (§ 1, no. 5, Corollary 2).

33



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

If G is a group with operators, the stable subgroup generated by a subset
of G consisting of pairwise permutable elements is not necessarily commuta-
tive.

Corollary 3. Let/: G -&gt; G' be a homomorphism of groups with operators and X a
subset o/G. The image under f of the stable subgroup ofG generated by"Xis the stable
subgroup ofG' generated byf(K).

Let X' =/(X). Then X' =/(X) and X'" 1 =/(X" 1 ). Hence

/(XuX" 1 ) =X'UX'" 1 .

The corollary then follows from § 1, no. 4, Proposition 1.

Example (2). Let G be a group and x an element of G. The subgroup gener-
ated by {x} (called more simply the subgroup generated by x) is the set of
x n , ne Z. The stable subset (under the law on G) generated by {x} is the
set of x n where n e N*. These two sets are in general distinct.

Thus, in the additive group Z, the subgroup generated by an element
x is the set x . Z of xn, «eZ, and the stable subset generated by x is the set
of xn, n e N*. These two sets are always distinct if x ^ 0.

The union of a right directed family of stable subgroups of G is obviously a
stable subgroup. It follows that, if P is a subset ofG and H a stable subgroup of
G not meeting P, the set of stable subgroups ofG containing H and not meeting
P, ordered by inclusion, is inductive (Set Theory, III, §2, no. 4). Applying
Zorn's Lemma (Set Theory, III, § 2, no. 4), we obtain the following result:

Proposition 3. Let G be a group with operators, P a subset ofG and H a stable sub-
group G not meeting P. The set of stable subgroups ofG containing H and not meeting P
has a maximal element.

4. QUOTIENT GROUPS

Theorem 1. Let R be an equivalence relation on a group with operators G;iJRm left
(resp. right) compatible (§ 3, no. 3) with the group law on G and compatible with the
action ofQ., the equivalence class of e is a stable subgroup Ho/G and the relation R is
equivalent to x~ x y e H (resp. yx~ x e H). Conversely, if His a stable subgroup ofG,
the relation x~ x y e H (resp. yx -1 eH) is an equivalence relation which is left (resp.
right) compatible with the group law on G and compatible with the action ofQ, and under
which H is the equivalence class of e.

We restrict our attention to the case where the relation R is left compatible
with the law on G (the case of a right compatible relation follows by replacing
the law on G by the opposite law). The relation y = x (mod. R) is equivalent to
x~ x y = e (mod. R), for y = x implies x~ x y = x~ x x = e and conversely
x~ x y = e implies y = x(x -1 y) = x. If H denotes the equivalence class of e, the

34



QUOTIENT GROUPS § 4.4

relation R is then equivalent to x~ x y £ H. We show that H is a stable subgroup
of G. For every operator a, the relation x = e implies x a = e* — e, hence
H"cH and H is stable under the action of CI. It suffices to establish (Propo-
sition 1) that x e H and yeH imply x~ x y £ H, that is x = e and y = e imply
x = y, which is a consequence of the transitivity of R.

Conversely, let H be a stable subgroup of G; the relation x _1 y£H is
reflexive since rt = «eH; it is symmetric since x~ x y eH implies
y~ x x — (r'^'^H; it is transitive, for x -1 y£H and y~ 1 zeH imply
x~ x z — (x~ 1 y)(y~ 1 z) e H; it is left compatible with the law of composition on
G, for x~ x y = (zx)~ 1 (zy) for all z e G; finally, for every operator a, the rela-
tion y e xH implies y a £ x a H a &lt;= a^H and hence the equivalence relation
x~ x y £ H is compatible with the action of Q on G.

Let G be a group and H a subgroup of G; the relation x _1 y eH (resp.
yx~ x e H) is also written in the equivalent form y exH. (resp. y e Hx). Every
subgroup H of G thus defines two equivalent relations on G, namely y £ xH and
y eHx: the equivalent classes under these relations are respectively the sets
xH, which are called left cosets ofH (or modulo H), and the sets Hx, which are
called right cosets ofH (or modulo H). By saturating a subset AcG with respect
to these relations (Set Theory, II, § 6, no. 4), we obtain respectively the sets
AH and HA. The mapping jcn-r 1 transforms left cosets modulo H into
right cosets modulo H and conversely.

The cardinal of the set of left cosets (mod. H) is called the index of the sub-
group H with respect to G and is denoted by (G : H) ; it is also equal to the
cardinal of the set of right cosets.

If a subgroup K of G contains H, it is a union of left (or right) cosets ofH.
Since a left coset of K is obtained from K by left translation, the set of left
cosets ofH contained in a left coset of K has cardinal independent of the latter.
Hence (Set Theory, III, § 5, no. 8, Proposition 9) :

Proposition 4. Let H and K be two subgroups of a group G such that H c: K. Then

(2) (G:H) = (G:K)(K:H).

Corollary. IfG is a finite group of order g and H is a subgroup of G of order h,
then

(3) h.(G:U)=g

(in particular, the order and index ofH are divisors of the order of G).

Theorem 1 allows us to determine the equivalence relations compatible with
the laws on a group with operators G: if R is such a relation, it is both left and
right compatible with the group law on G and with the action of Q. Hence, if
H is the class of e (mod. R), H is a stable subgroup such that the relations
y e xH and y e Hx are equivalent (since both are equivalent to R) ; hence
xH = Hx for all x £ G. Conversely, if this is so, one or other of the equivalent

35



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

relations y e xH, y e Hx is compatible with the group law, since it is both left
and right compatible with this law (§ 3, no. 4) and is compatible with the
action of Q. Since the equation xH = Hx is equivalent to xHx' 1 = H, we
make the following definition :

Definition 5. Let G be a group with operators. A stable subgroup HofGis called a
normal (or invariant) stable subgroup o/G ifxHx' 1 = Hfor all x e G.

If CI = 0, a normal stable subgroup of G is called a normal (or invariant)
subgroup of G. In a commutative group every subgroup is normal.

To verify that a stable subgroup H is normal, it suffices to show that
xKx~ x c H for all x s G; for if so then a^Hx c: H for all x e G, that is
H &lt;= xHx~ x , and hence H = xH* -1 .

Let H be a normal stable subgroup of G and R the equivalence relation
y G *H defined by H; on the quotient set G/R, the internal law, the quotient
by R of the law of the group G, is associative; the class of e is the identity
element of this quotient law; the classes of two inverse elements in G are
inverses under the quotient law and the action of Q, the quotient by R of the
action of CI on G, is distributive with respect to the internal law on G/R (§ 3,
no. 5). Hence, summarizing the results obtained:

Theorem 2. Let G be a group with operators. For an equivalence relation R on G to be
compatible with the group law and the action of CI, it is necessary and sufficient that it be of
the form x~ x y eH, where H is a normal stable subgroup ofG (the relation r^eH
being moreover equivalent toyx' 1 e Hfor such a subgroup). The law of composition on
G/R the quotient of that on G and the action of CI on G/R the quotient of that of CI on
G by such a relation R give G/R the structure of a group with operators, called the quotient
structure, and the canonical mapping of the passage to the quotient is a homomorphism of
groups with operators.

Definition 6. The quotient of a group with operators G by the equivalence relation
defined by a normal subgroup HofG, with the quotient structure, is called the quotient
group with operators of G by H and is denoted by G/H. The canonical mapping
G -&gt; G/H is called a canonical homomorphism

Let G be a group and H a normal subgroup of G. The quotient G/H, with
its group structure, is called the quotient group of G by H. For a mapping from
G/H to a group with operators to be a homomorphism of groups with operators,
it is necessary and sufficient that its composition with the canonical mapping
of G onto G/H be one: this justifies the name "quotient group" (Set Theory, IV,
§2, no. 6).

The equivalence relation defined by a normal stable subgroup of G is denoted
by x = y (mod. H) or x = y(H).

36



DECOMPOSITION OF A HOMOMORPHISM § 4.5

Proposition 5. Let/: G -&gt; G' be a homomorphism of groups with operators and H and
H' normal stable subgroups o/G and G' respectively such thatf(H) c H'. The mapping
fis compatible with the equivalence relations defined by H and H'. Let tz : G -&gt; G/H and
n' : G' -&gt; G'/H' fo ^ canonical homomorphisms. The mapping f: G/H -&gt; G'/H'
derived from f by passing to the quotients is a homomorphism.

If x = y (mod. H), then x~ x y eH, whence

/W-yCy) =/(^" 1 )/(y) =/(*- x y) e/(H) c h'

and hence/(*) = /(y) (mod. H') . The second assertion follows from the univer-
sal property of quotient laws (§ 1, no. 6).

Remarks. (1) If A is any subset of a group G and H is a normal subgroup of
G, then AH = HA; this set is obtained by saturating A with respect to the
relation x = y (mod. H).

(2) If H is a normal subgroup of G of finite index, the quotient group
G/H is a finite group of order (G:H).

Note that if H is a normal subgroup of a group G and K is a normal subgroup
of H, K is not necessarily a normal subgroup of G (I, § 5, Exercise 10).

Let G be a group with operators. The intersection of every family of normal
stable subgroups of G is a normal stable subgroup. Hence, for every subset X of
G, there exists a smallest normal stable subgroup containing X, called the
normal stable subgroup generated by X.

In a group with operators G, the stable subgroups G and {e} are normal.

Definition 7. A group with operators G is called simple ifG # {e} and there exists
no normal stable subgroup ofG other than G and {e}.

5. DECOMPOSITION OF A HOMOMORPHISM

Proposition 6. Let G be a group with operators and G' a magma with an action by D,
written exponentially. Let /: G -&gt; G' be a homomorphism of the magna G into the
magma G' such that, for all xeQ and all x e G,/(*«) =/(*)". Thenf(G) is a
stable subset ofG' under the law on G' and the action of Q; the setf(G) with the induced
laws is a group with operators and the mapping x &gt;-&gt;/(*) ofG intof(G) is a homo-
morphism of groups with operators.

By virtue of § 1, no. 4, Proposition 1,/(G) is a stable subset ofG' under the
internal law on G'. For every element x eG and for every operator a,
/(*) a =/(**) e/(G) and therefore /(G) is stable under the action of Q. on
G\ Writing the internal law of G' multiplicatively,

C/W(y))/O0 =f(*y)f(z) =M*y)z) =/(*(y*)) =f(*)f(yz)

=/(*)C/W0O)

for all elements x, y, z in G; therefore the induced law on /(G) is associative.

37



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Let e be the identity element of G. Its image fie) is an identity element of
/(G) (§2, no. 1). Every element of /(G) is invertible in /(G) (§2, no. 3).
Therefore the law induced on /(G) by the internal law on G' is a group law.
For all elements x and y in G and every operator a,

(/(*)/(*))" = (/to))" =M*yY) =/(*"*") =f(**)f(y*) = (/W) a (/(y)) a

which shows that the action of Q is distributive with respect to the group
law on/(G). Therefore/(G) with the induced laws is a group with operators
and clearly the mapping x &gt;-&gt;/(x) is a homomorphism of groups with operators.

Definition 8. Let /: G -&gt; G' be a homomorphism of groups with operators. The
inverse image of the identity element ofG' is called the kernel of/

The kernel of/is often denoted by Ker(/) and the image/(G) of/is some-
times denoted by Im(/).

Theorem 3. Letf: G -&gt; G' be a homomorphism of groups with operators.

(a) Ker(/) is a normal stable subgroup ofG;

(b) Im(/) is a stable subgroup ofG';

(c) the mapping f is compatible with the equivalence relation defined on G by Ker(/) ;

(d) the mapping}: G/Ker(/) ~&gt; Im(/) derived from f by passing to the quotient
is an isomorphism of groups with operators;

(e) / = i o/o 7T, where i is the canonical injection oflm(f) into G' and tc is the
canonical homomorphism ofG onto G/Ker(/).

Assertion (b) follows from Proposition 6. The equivalence relation f(x) =
f(y) on G is compatible with the group with operators structure on G. By
Theorem 2 (no. 4), it is therefore of the formy e xH, where H is a normal stable
subgroup ofG and H is the class of the identity element, whence H = Ker(/).
Assertions (a), (c) and (d) then follow. Assertion (e) is obvious (Set Theory, II,
§6, no. 5).

6. SUBGROUPS OF A QUOTIENT GROUP

Proposition 7. Let G and H be two groups with operators, f a homomorphism of G
into H and N the kernel off.

(a) Let H' be a stable subgroup ofH. The inverse image G' = f (H') is a stable
subgroup ofG and G' is normal in G ifW is normal in H. Further, N is a normal sub-
group ofG'. Iff is surjective, then H' =/(G') and f defines an isomorphism qfG'/N
onto H' on passing to the quotient.

(b) Let G' be a stable subgroup ofG. The image H' =/(G') is a stable subgroup

ofHandf\ii') = G'N = NG'. In particular, f (H.') = G' if and only if 'N &lt;= G'.
Iff is surjective and G' is normal in G, then H' is normal in H.

(a) Let x and y be in G'andaeQ; then/(x) e H' and/(y) e H', whence
38



SUBGROUPS OF A QUOTIENT GROUP § 4.6

/(xy 1 ) =f{x)f(y)~ 1 e H', that is xy' 1 e G'; hence G' is a subgroup of G.
Now/(# a ) = /(x) a g H', whence x a e G' and therefore G' is stable. Suppose
H' is normal in H and let x e G', y e G; then/(*) e H' and

/(yxy- 1 ) =/(y)/W/(y)" 1 eH'

whence yxy~ x e G'; hence G' is normal in G. For all n e N, f(n) = e e H',

whence N &lt;= G' ; as N is normal in G, it is normal in G'. Finally, if/is surjective,

-l
/(/ (A)) = A for every subset A of H, whence H' = f(G') ; the restriction of
/to G' is a homomorphism/' of G' onto H' of kernel N, hence/' defines on
passing to the quotient an isomorphism of G'/N onto H'.

(b) Let a and b be in H' and a in Q; there exist x, y in G' with a —f{x)

and b =f{y), whence ab~ x = f(xy~ 1 ) eH', hence H' is a subgroup of H

-l
which is stable, for a" = /(* a ) e H'. Let *eG; then x e f (H') if and only if

f(x) e H' =/(G'), that is if and only if there exists y in G' with/(*) =f(y) ;

the relation /(a:) =/(y) is equivalent to the existence of n eN with x = yn;

-i
finally, x e / (H') is equivalent to x e G'N = NG'. Clearly the relation

G' = G'N is equivalent to G' =&gt; N. Suppose finally that/ is surjective and G'
is normal in G ; let a e H' and b e H; there exist xeG' and y eG with a — f(x)
and b =/{y), whence bab' 1 =f(yxy' 1 ) e/(G') = H'. Hence H' is normal
inH.

Corollary 1. Suppose that/ is surjective. Let © (resp. ©') be the set of stable (resp.

normal stable) subgroups ofG containing N and § (resp. £') the set of stable (resp.

normal stable) subgroups of H, these sets being ordered by inclusion. The mapping

G' i-&gt;/(G') is an ordered set isomorphism O :©-&gt;§; the inverse isomorphism

-l
*F: £-&gt;© is the mapping H' t-&gt; /(H'). Further O and T induce isomorphisms

O': ©'-»£' and T':$'-^©'.

Corollary 2. Let f: G-&gt;H be a homomorphism of groups with operators, N the
kernel off, G' a stable subgroup ofG and L a normal stable subgroup ofG'. Then LN,
L. (G' n N) andf(h) are normal stable subgroups of G'N, G' andf(G') respectively
and the three quotient groups with operators G'N/LN, G'/L. (G' n N) andf(G')/f(L)
are isomorphic.

Let H' = /(G') and /' denote the homomorphism of G' onto H' which
coincides with / on G'; the kernel of/' is GnN and /'(L) =/(L); by
Proposition 7,/'(L) is a normal stable subgroup of H' and

/'(/'(L))=L.(G'nN)

is a normal stable subgroup ofG'. Let X be the canonical homomorphism of H'
onto H'//'(L) =/(G')//(L) : as X &lt;&gt;/' is surjective with kernel



/'(/'(L)) =L.(G'nN),



39



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

it defines an isomorphism of G'/L. (G' n N) onto/(G')//(L). By Proposition

7, (b), / (H') = G'N; if/" is the homomorphism of G'N onto H' which co-
incides with/ on G'N, the homomorphism X of" of G'N onto/(G')//(L) is sur-

jective with kernel / (/(L)) = LN; this proves that LN is a normal stable sub-
group of G'N and that X of" defines an isomorphism of G'N/LN onto

/(G')//(L).

Corollary 3. Let f: G -&gt; H be a homomorphism of groups with operators, N its
kernel, X a subset ofG such thatf(X) generates H and Y a subset ofN which generates
N. Then XuY generates N.

Let G' be the stable subgroup of G generated byXuY.AsYcG'.Nc G'.

As/(X) &lt;=/(G'),/(G') = H , whence G' = /(H) = G.

Remark. In the notation of Proposition 7, the fact that the inverse image of a
subgroup of H is a subgroup of G follows from the following more general
fact.

If A and B are subsets ofH and f is surjective, then

/(A.B) = /(A). /(B), /(A" x ) = /(A)" 1 .

-i -l -i -i

Obviously / (A) . / (B) c / (A . B) ; on the other hand, if z e f (A . B), there

exists a e A and ieB such that/(z) = ab; as/ is surjective, there exists xeG

such that /(*) = a; writing y = x~ x z, f{y) = a~ x f(z) = b and z = ^y,

-l -l -i

whence z £ / (A) . / (B). The relation * e / (A" x ) is equivalent to/(*) e A" 1 ,

-l -i

hence to/(*- x ) e A, that is to x~ x e f (A) and finally to x e / (A) \

Proposition 8. Let G be a group with operators and A and B two stable subgroups of
G. Suppose that the relations aeA and beB imply aba -1 e B *(m o^r awdfr, A
normalizes B)*. T^n AB = BA is a stable subgroup ofG,AnBisa normal stable
subgroup of A and Bis a normal stable subgroup of AB. The canonical injection of A into
AB defines on passing to the quotient an isomorphism o/*A/(A n B) onto AB/B.

The formulae

(ab)(a'b') = aa'{a'- x ba' .b')
(ab)- 1 = a-\ab- x a- y )
(ab)" = a*b*

for a, a' e A, b, b' e B and every operator a on G, show that AB is a stable
subgroup of G. Let aeA and xeAnB; then axa' 1 eB by the hypotheses
made on A and B and clearly axa " x belongs to A, hence A n B is normal in A.
Let a e A and b, b' be in B; the formula (ab)b'(ab)~ x = a(bb'b~ x )a- x shows that
B is normal in AB. Let &lt;j&gt; be the restriction to A of the canonical homomorphism

40



THE JORDAN-HOLDER THEOREM § 4.7

of AB onto AB/B; then §(a) = aB and hence the kernel of &lt;j&gt; is equal to A n B.

Clearly &lt;j&gt; is surjective and hence defines an isomorphism of A/ (A n B) onto

AB/B.

Theorem 4. Let G be a group with operators and N a normal stable subgroup of G.

(a) The mapping G' •-&gt; G'/N is a bisection of the set of stable subgroups ofG con-
taining N onto the set of stable subgroups of G/N.

(b) Let G' be a stable subgroup ofG containing N. For G'/N to be normal in G/N, it
is necessary and sufficient that G' be normal in G and the groups G/G' and
(G/N) /(G'/N) are then isomorphic.

(c) Let G' be a stable subgroup of G. Then G'N is a stable subgroup of G and N
is normal in G'N. Further G'nN is normal in G' and the groups G'/(G' n N) and
G'N/N are isomorphic.

Let f denote the canonical homomorphism of G onto G/N. For all x e G,
/(#) g *N; therefore, /(G') = G'/N for every subgroup G' ofG containing N.
As f is surjective, assertion (a) follows from Corollary 1 to Proposition 7 ;
similarly for the equivalence "G' normal" o "G'/N normal". Suppose that
G' is a normal stable subgroup of G containing N. By no. 4, Proposition 5
applied to Id G , there exists a homomorphism u of G/N into G/G' defined by
u{xN) = xG' for all x e G. It is immediate that u is surjective with kernel G'/N
whence the desired isomorphism of (G/N) /(G'/N) onto G/G'. Finally, (c)
follows immediately from Proposition 8.

7. THE JORDAN-HOLDER THEOREM

Definition 9. A composition series of a group with operators G is a finite sequence
(G t ) 0&lt;Ja - B of stable subgroups of G, with G = G and G n = {e} and such that
G i + 1 is a normal subgroup ofG t for &lt; i ^ n — 1. The quotients GJG i + 1 are called
the quotients of the series. A composition series 2' is said to be finer than a composition
series HiflZisa series taken from 2'.

If (Gj) ^ 4 ^ n and (H y ) 0&lt;i&lt;m are respectively composition series of two groups with
operators G and H, they are said to be equivalent ifm = n and there exists a permutation
&lt;J&gt; of the interval (0, n — 1) ofS, such that the groups with operators Gj/G {+1 and
H^/H^j) + ! are isomorphic for all i.

Note that in general a series taken from a composition series (G ( ) is not a
composition series, since for J &gt; i + 1, G } is not in general a normal sub-
group of G ( .

Theorem 5 (Schreier). Given two composition series S 1} H 2 ofa group with operators
G, there exist two equivalent composition series !![, 2^, fi ner respectively than S x and

Let 2 X = (ILJo^j^,, and S 2 = (K y ) 0&lt; y &lt;p be the two given composition
series with respectively n + 1 and p + 1 terms; we shall see that the com-
position series Si can be formed by inserting p — 1 subgroups HJ y

41



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(1 &lt;j^p— 1) between H 4 and H i+1 for ^ i "^ n — 1 and the series Eg
by inserting n — 1 subgroups Ky &gt;( (1 ^ i ^ n — 1) between K y and K /+1 for
^ j &lt; p — 1 ; thus two series of pn + 1 stable subgroups of G will be
obtained; by choosing suitably the inserted stable subgroups, we shall show
that these series are equivalent composition series.

To this end note that H t n Ky is a stable subgroup of H 4 and of Ky and hence
(Theorem 4) H i+1 .(H i n Ky) is a stable subgroup of H f containing H, +1 and
K. j+1 .(H l r\K j ) is a stable subgroup of K f containing K i + 1 . If we write
H' uj = Hi +1 .(H t n K y ) and K' ht = Ky + 1 .(H, n Ky), HJ.y + i is a stable sub-
group of H,' ( y (0 ^j &lt; /&gt; - 1) and Ky i + 1 is a stable subgroup of Ky fi
(0 &lt; t &lt; n - 1). Moreover Hj' (0 = H j5 H| &gt;p = H i+1 , K; &gt;0 = K y and
Kf P = Ky + 1 . To show the theorem, it suffices to show that H' itj+1 (resp.
Ky &gt;i + 1 ) is a normal stable subgroup of H ( 'y (resp. Ky &gt;{ ) and that the quotient
groups Hj'y/H^y+i and Ky fi /Kj 1 + 1 are isomorphic (0 ^ i ^ n — 1,
^j ^ p — 1). This follows from the following lemma by taking H = H,,
H' = H j + 1 , K = Ky, K' = Ky + 1 .

Lemma 1 (Zassenhaus) . Let H and K fo two stable subgroups of a group with
operators G and H' and K' worma/ .rta£/&lt;? subgroups of H arad K respectively; then
H'.(Hn K') is a normal stable subgroup of H'.(HnK), K'.(Kn H') is a
normal stable subgroup of K'.(KnH) and the quotient groups with operators
(H'.(HnK))/(H'.(HnK')) and (K'.(K n H))/(K'.(K n H')) are iso-
morphic.

By Theorem 4,H'nK = H'n(HnK) is a normal stable subgroup of
HnK; similarly K' n H is a normal stable subgroup of KnH; hence
(no. 6, Corollary 2) (H' n K)(K' n H) is a normal stable subgroup of H n K.
By Theorem 4 applied to the group H,

H'.(H'nK).(K'nH) =H'.(HnK')

is a normal stable subgroup of H'. (H n K) and the quotient group

(H'.(HnK))/(H'.(HnK))

is isomorphic to

(H n K)/((H' n K) . (K' n H)).

In the last quotient, H and H' on the one hand and K and K' on the other
appear symmetrically; permuting them the stated result is obtained.

Definition 10. A Jordan-Holder series of a group with operators G is a strictly
decreasing decomposition series 2 such that there exists no strictly decreasing decomposition
series distinct from 2 and finer than 2.

Proposition 9. For a decomposition series of G to be a Jordan-Holder series it is
necessary and sufficient that all the quotients of the series be simple.

42



THE JORDAN-HOLDER THEOREM § 4.7

A decomposition series is strictly decreasing if and only if none of its succes-
sive quotients is reduced to the identity element. If a strictly decreasing com-
position series 2 is not a Jordan-Holder series, there exists a strictly decreasing
composition series 2' which is finer than 2 and distinct from 2. There are there-
fore two consecutive terms G i} G i + 1 of 2 which are not consecutive in 2'; let H
be the first term which follows G t in 2'; H is a normal stable subgroup of G 1}
containing G j + 1 and distinct from the latter; hence H/G { + 1 is a normal stable
subgroup of Gj/G i + 1 , distinct from the latter and from the identity element;
therefore Gj/Gj + 1 is not simple. Conversely, if 2 is a strictly decreasing com-
position series one of whose quotients G t /G i + 1 is not simple, this quotient con-
tains a normal stable subgroup other than itself and {e}, whose inverse image in
G { is a normal stable subgroup H of G j5 distinct from G 4 and G i + 1 (Theorem 4) ;
it suffices to insert H between G { and G i + 1 to obtain a strictly decreasing
composition series distinct from 2 and finer than 2.

Theorem 6 (Jordan-Holder). Two Jordan-Holder series of a group with operators
are equivalent.

Let 2 l5 2 2 be two Jordan-Holder series of a group with operators G; by
applying Theorem 5 two equivalent composition series 2£, 2 2 are obtained
which are respectively finer than 2 X and 2 2 ; since the latter are Jordan-
Holder series, 2^ is identical with 2 x or is derived from it by repeating certain
terms; the series of quotients of 2^ is derived from that for 2 X by inserting a
number of terms isomorphic to the group {e}; since 2 X is strictly decreasing, the
series of quotients of 2 X is derived from that of 2£ by suppressing in the latter all
the terms isomorphic to {e}. Similarly for 2 2 and 2 2 . As the series of quotients of
2^ and 2 2 differ (up to isomorphism) only in the order of the terms, the same is
true of 2 X and 2 2 ; the theorem is proved.

Corollary. Let G be a group with operators in which there exists a Jordan-Holder
series. If 2 is any strictly decreasing composition series of G, there exists a Jordan-
Holder series finer than 2.

Let 2 be a Jordan-Holder series of G; by Theorem 5, there exist two
equivalent composition series, 2' and 2q respectively finer than 2 and 2 ; the
argument of Theorem 6 shows that, by suppressing from 2' the repetitions, a
sequence 2" is obtained which is equivalent to 2 and hence a Jordan-Holder
series, since all its quotients are simple (Proposition 9). As 2 is strictly decreas-
ing, 2" is finer than 2, whence the corollary.

Remark. A group with operators does not always possess a Jordan-Holder
series; an example is given by the additive group Z of rational integers:
the sequence (2 n .Z) n&gt;0 is a strictly decreasing infinite sequence of (normal)
subgroups of Z; for all p, the first p terms of this sequence form with the

43



ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

group {0} a strictly decreasing composition series; if there existed a Jordan-
Holder series for Z, it would have at least p + 1 terms, by the Corollary to
Theorem 6; absurd, since p is arbitrary.

On the other hand, there exists a Jordan-Holder series in every finite
group with operators G : if G ^ {«}, among the normal stable subgroups of
G distinct from G, let H x be a maximal subgroup; similarly define H n + 1 by
induction as a maximal element in the set of normal subgroups of H„ dis-
tinct from H n , when H n ^ {e}; the sequence of orders of the H n is strictly
decreasing, hence there exists n such that H n = {e} and the sequence con-
sisting of G and the H ( (1 «£«'&lt;«) is by its formation a Jordan-Holder



Definition 11. Let G be a group with operators; the length of G is the upper bound of
the integers n such that there exists a strictly decreasing composition series o/G (G ( ) 0&lt;(&lt;n .

If G admits a Jordan-Holder series, the length of G is the number of successive
quotients of this series, as follows from the Corollary to Theorem 6. If G does
not admit a Jordan-Holder series, its length is infinite; by Proposition 9, for
every strictly decreasing series of G there exists a strictly finer strictly decreasing
series. The group consisting of the identity element is the only group with
operators of length zero. A group with operators is simple if and only if it is of
length 1.

Let G be a group with operators, H a normal stable subgroup of G, K the
quotient G/H and n: G -&gt; K the canonical homomorphism. Let

2' = (Hj) 0&lt;J ^ n

be a decomposition series of H and S" = (K y ) 0&lt;y&lt;p be a composition series of

K. Writing G t = ^(Kj) for ^ i ^ p and G 4 = H^ for p ^ i ^ n + p, a



composition series 2 = (G t ) 0&lt;t&lt;n + P of G is obtained. The sequence of quo-
tients of S is obtained by juxtaposing the sequence of quotients of 2" and the
sequence of quotients of 2'. If 2' and 2" are Jordan-Holder series, 2 is a Jordan-
Holder series of G, by Proposition 9. If H or K admits composition series of
arbitrary length, so does G. We have proved:

Proposition 10. Let Gbea group with operators and H a normal stable subgroup o/G.
The length of G is the sum of the lengths ofli and G/H.

Corollary. Let Gbea group with operators and {Gi) 0&lt;i&lt;n a composition series o/G.
The length ofG is the sum of the lengths of the G,/G i + 1 , ^ i &lt; n — 1.

If G and G' are isomorphic groups with operators and G admits a Jordan-
Holder series, so does G' and the Jordan-Holder series of G and G' are equiva-
lent. However, non-isomorphic groups can have equivalent Jordan-Holder
series; such is true for Z/4Z and (Z/2Z) x (Z/2Z), cf. no. 10.

44



PRODUCTS AND FIBRE PRODUCTS § 4.8

8. PRODUCTS AND FIBRE PRODUCTS

Let (G,) j6l be a family of groups with operators. Let G be the product monoid
of the Gj. Consider the action of Q. on G defined by

((*i)iei) a = (*?)i si (a e Q, x t e G f ).

With this structure G is a group with operators. For all i e I, the projection
mapping pr 4 : G -&gt; G 4 is a homomorphism of groups with operators.

Definition 12. The group with operators G = O G { defined above is the product

group with operators of the G t . The mappings pr,: G-»G, are called the
projection homomorphisms.

A particular case of the product of groups with operators is the group G E
consisting of the mappings of a set E into a group with operators G, the laws
being defined by :

(/*)(*) «/(*)*(*) if, g e G E , x e E)

Let (&lt;{&gt;,: H -&gt; G,) j6l be a family of homomorphisms of groups with operators.
The mapping h &gt;-&gt; (§i(h)) ieI of H into O G { is a homomorphism of groups

with operators. It is the only homomorphism OiH-^IlGj satisfying
pr-j o O = (^ for all i. This justifies the name "product group with operators"
(Set Theory, IV, § 2, no. 4).

Let ((j»j : H 4 -&gt; G ( ) ieI be a family of homomorphisms of groups with operators.
The mapping Tl &lt;{&gt;,: (n f ) ieI k&gt; (&amp;&amp;)), eI of Et H t into Yl G, is a homomor-

leI &lt;£! &lt;el

phism of groups with operators.

Proposition 11. Let (fa: H,-* G t ) tel be a family of homomorphisms of groups with

operators and let O = ii 4. Then:
lei T

(a) Ker(&lt;I&gt;) = 11 Ker(&lt;j&gt;j) ; in particular, if all the &lt;j&gt; t are injective, O w injective.

(b) Im(&lt;I&gt;) = 11 Im (&lt;[&gt;,) ; in particular, if all the &lt;J&gt; t ar* surjective, O w w-

This is immediate.

In particular, let (G,) i6l be a family of groups with operators and, for all i,

45



ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES



let Hj be a stable (resp. normal stable) subgroup of G { . The product 1 1 H { is a
stable (resp. normal stable) subgroup of 1 1 G 4 and the canonical mapping of
11 Gj onto O (Gj/Hj) defines when passing to the quotient an isomorphism of

onto 11 (Gj/Hj). For example, let J be a subset of I. The subgroup Gj of
I~I G { consisting of the (x t ) iel such that x x = e t for i $ J is a normal stable sub-

i 6 I

group. The mapping tj which associates with x — (Xj) jeJ the element
y = (yt)iei such that y t = e ( for i $ J andy t = # t for i e J, is an isomorphism of

I! G. onto Gj. The mapping pr x _ j defines when passing to the quotient an

j £ J

isomorphism 0j of the quotient group G/Gj onto 1 1 G ( . The composition

pr a o tj is the identity mapping of ll G,. G/G a is often identified with

i e J

ll G, because of 0r and 1 1 G, with Gj because of tj.

i e I-J i e J

If J x and J 2 are disjoint subsets of I, it follows from the definitions that every
element of G Jx commutes with every element of G j2 .

Definition 13. Let G be a group with operators and (H t ) ieI a family of normal stable
subgroups of G. Let p t :G—&gt; G/H { be the canonical homomorphism. G is called the
internal product {or product) of the family of quotient groups (G/Hj) if the homomor-
phism g (-&gt;- (pi(g))i e i is an isomorphism ofG onto 1 1 G/Hj.

Let G and H be groups with operators and let &lt;J&gt; and &lt;\&gt; be two homomor-
phisms of G into H. The set of elements x in G such that fax) = fax) is a
stable subgroup of G, called the coincidence group of &lt;f) and tp. In particular, let
&lt;i&gt;i : G x -» H and fa : G 2 -&gt; H be homomorphisms of groups with operators; the
coincidence group of the homomorphisms fa ° pr x and &lt;j&gt; 2 ° pr 2 of G x x G 2
into H is called the fibre product of G x and G 2 over H relative to &lt;J&gt;j. and &lt;|) 2 . It is
denoted by G x x H G 2 when there is no ambiguity about fa and &lt;J&gt; 2 and the
restrictions p x and p 2 of pr x and pr 2 to Gj x H G 2 are also called projection
homomorphisms. Then fa ° p x = fa ° p 2 - The elements of G x x H G 2 are the
ordered pairs (g 1} g 2 ) e G x x G 2 such that &lt;|&gt;i(gi) = fa(g 2 )- If/i is a homo-
morphism of a group with operators K into G { (i = 1, 2) and &lt;j&gt;i of t = fa °f 2 ,
there exist one and only one homomorphism/ of K into G x x H G 2 such that
f i =p l offovi= 1,2.

46



RESTRICTED SUMS § 4.9

9. RESTRICTED SUMS

Let (G t ) j6l be a family of groups with operators and, for ie I, let H, be a
stable subgroup of G f . The subset of 1 1 G { consisting of the (x t ) ieI such that the

set of i e I with x t $ H f is finite is a stable subgroup of 1 1 G t equal to 1 1 G { if I

is finite. It is called the restricted sum of the G f with respect to the H,. When, for all i
except for a finite number, Hj is a normal stable subgroup of G ( , the restricted
sum is a normal stable subgroup of the product. When, for all i, the subgroup
H f is reduced to the identity element of G ( , the direct sum of the G 4 with respect
to the Hj is called simply the restricted sum of the G { and is sometimes denoted by

1 1 G ( . For all i Q e I, the mapping t iQ : G &lt;0 -» 1 1 Gj defined by i h (x) = (*|) |6I ,

where x lo = tfandxj = ^ifi # i , is an injective homomorphism of groups with
operators called the canonical injection. G ( is identified with the stable subgroup
Im(tj). The subgroups G 4 are normal. For i # j, the elements of Gj and G y

commute and G 4 n G y = {e}. The group 1 1 G, is generated by the set U Gj.

Proposition 12. Let (fa: G { — &gt;K) ieI be a family of homomorphisms of groups with
operators such that, for all iel and j el with i J= j, x e G f , y e G j} the elements
§i{x) and §j(y) ofK. commute; there exists one and only one homomorphism of groups

with operators O of 1 1 G t into K such that fa = O o i t for all iel. For every element

X = (*i)iel ofTl G i} &lt;&amp;(*) = n fa(x t ).

If O and O are solutions to the problem, they coincide on U G t and hence
on 1 1 Gj, whence the uniqueness of O. We now show the existence of &lt;f&gt; : for

every element x = fc)iei of I i G h let &lt;b(x) =11 fa(x t ) (§ 1, no. 5).

Clearly Ooi ( = ^, for all i and O commutes with homotheties; the formula
O(xy) = 0(#)®(y) follows from § 1, no. 5, formula (9).

Definition 14. Let G be a group with operators and (Hj) j6l a family of stable sub-
groups of G.G is called the internal restricted sum (or restricted sum) of the family
of subgroups (Hj) if every element of Hi is permutable with every element ofHjforj ^ i

and the unique homomorphism of 1 1 H t into G whose restriction to each of the H t is the
canonical injection is an isomorphism.

When I is finite, we also say, by an abuse of language, internal direct product
(or direct product, or product) instead of internal restricted sum. Every stable

47



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

subgroup H of G for which there exists a stable subgroup H' of G such that G
is the direct product of H and H' is called a direct factor of G.

Proposition 13. Let G be a group with operators and (H,), eI a family of stable sub-
groups of G such that every element of H 4 is permutable with every element of Hj for
j ^ i. For G to be the restricted sum of the family of subgroups (Hj) j6l , it is necessary

and sufficient that every element xofGbe expressible uniquely in the form 1 ly { , where

(yi)iei ^ a family with finite support of elements ofG withy t e H t for all i.

Obvious.

Proposition 14. Let G be a group with operators and (H-i) ieI a finite family of stable
subgroups of G. For G to be the restricted sum of the family of subgroups (H,), it is
necessary and sufficient that each H { be normal and that G be the product of the quotient
groups (G/H 1 ), where H* is the subgroup generated by the Hjforj # i.

The condition is obviously necessary. Conversely, suppose G is the product
of the K { = G/H' and let G be identified with the product of the K ( . Then H, is
identified with a subgroup of K l5 so that, for i ^ j, every element of H 4 is
permutable with every element of H y ; on the other hand, H J is identified with
the product of the K y for j ^ *, hence H 4 = K t for all i and G is the direct
product of the H { .

Proposition 15. Let G be a group with operators and (Hj) 1&lt;f &lt;n a sequence of normal
stable subgroups of G such that

(HA,. . .H { ) n H i+1 = {e} for 1 &lt; i ^ n - 1,

the set HjHa . . .H n is a normal stable subgroup ofG, the restricted sum of the H t .

By induction on n } this is immediately reduced to proving the proposition for
n = 2. We show first that, if x e H x and y e H 2 , x and y are permutable-, for
xyx'^' 1 = (xyx " x ) y " x = x (yx ~ x y ~ l ) and hence (since H x and H 2 are normal)
xyx-^' 1 eHi n H 2 , that is xyx'^y' 1 = e, by the hypothesis. Moreover
HjH 2 is a subset of G which is stable under the homotheties of G. It follows
(by no. 3, Proposition 1) that HJiz is a stable subgroup ofG and it is immedi-
ately verified that this subgroup is normal. Suppose finally that xy = x'y', with
x e H l5 x' e Hi, y e H 2 , y' e H 2 ; then x'~ 1 x = y'y~\ hence x'- 1 e H x n H 2 =
{e}, x' = x and similarly y' = y; HiH 2 is thus the direct product of H x and
H 2 .

When the group considered are commutative, the term direct sum is used
instead of direct product.

10. MONOGENOUS GROUPS

Let a E Z; since dL is a subgroup of Z, the relation between elements x, y of Z
which states "there exists z e Z such that x - y = az" is an equivalence

48



MONOGENOUS GROUPS §4.10

relation, which we agree, once and for all, to write as x = y (mod. a) or
* = !/( a ) an d which is called congruence modulo a. Replacing a by —a an equiva-
lent relation is obtained, hence it may be supposed that a ^ 0; for a = 0,
x = y(0) means x = y, hence a relation distinct from equality is obtained only
if a # : we shall therefore suppose in what follows that a &gt; unless other-
wise indicated.

For a &gt; 0, the quotient of Z by the congruence x = y(a), that is the group
Z/aZ, is called the group of rational integers modulo a.

Proposition 16. Let a be an integer &gt;0. The integers r such that &lt; r &lt; a form a
system of representatives of the equivalence relation x = y (mod. a) on Z.

If x is an integer ^0, there exist (Set Theory, III, § 5, no. 6) integers q and r
such that x = aq + r and ^ r &lt; a and x = r (mod. a). If x is an integer
&lt; 0, the integer — x is ^ and by the above there exists an integer r such that
&lt;: r &lt; a and — x = r (mod. a). Writing r' = if r = and r' = a — r if
r &gt; 0, then

a; = — r = r' (mod. a)

and ^ r' &lt; a. We now show that if ^ r &lt; r' &lt; a, then r £ r' (mod. a).
Now r' — r &lt; na for n ^ 1 and r' — r &gt; na for n ^ 0, whence r' — r $ dZ.

Corollary. Let a be an integer &gt; 0. The group Z/aZ of rational integers modulo a is
a group of order a.

Proposition 1 7. Let Hbea subgroup ofZ. There exists one and only one integer a ^
such that H = aZ.

If H = {0}, then H = 0Z. Suppose that H # {0}. The subgroup H has an
element x ^ 0. Then x &gt; or -x &gt; 0, and therefore H has elements &gt;0.
Let a be the smallest element &gt; in H. The subgroup aZ generated by a is
contained in H; we show that H &lt;=: aZ. Let yeH. By Proposition 16, there
exists an integer r such that y = r (mod. a) and &lt; r &lt; a. A fortiori y = r
(mod. H), whence reH. But this is only possible if r = and therefore
yeaZ. The integer a is unique: if H = {0}, then necessarily a = 0, and if
H 7^ {0}, the integer a is the order of Z/H.

Definition 15. A group is called monogenous if it admits a system of generators con-
sisting of a single element. A finite monogenous group is called cyclic.

Every monogenous group is commutative (no. 3, Corollary 2 to Proposition
2). Every quotient group of a monogenous group is monogenous (no. 3,
Corollary 3 to Proposition 2).

The additive group Z is monogenous: it is generated by {1}. For every
positive integer a, the group Z/aZ is monogenous, for it is a quotient of Z.

49



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Proposition 18.-4 finite monogenous group of order a is isomorphic to ZjaZ, An
infinite monogenous group is isomorphic to Z.

Let G be a monogenous group (written multiplicatively) and x a generator
of G. The identity x m x n = x m +n (§ 1, no. 3, formula (1)) shows that the mapping
n ■-&gt; x n is a homomorphism of Z into G. Its image is a subgroup of G containing
x and hence it is G. By no. 5, Theorem 3, the group G is isomorphic to the
quotient of Z by a subgroup, which is necessarily of the form aZ (Proposition
17). If a &gt; 0, the group G is finite of order a and if a = 0, the group G is iso-
morphic to Z.

Proposition 19. Let a he an integer &gt; 0. Let H be a subgroup ofZ/aZ, b the order of
H and c its index in ZjaZ. Then a — bc,H = cZ/aZ and H is isomorphic to Z/bZ.

Conversely, let b and c be two integers &gt; such that a = be. Then aZ &lt;= cZ and
cZ/aZ is a subgroup of ZjaZ, of order b and index c.

a = be by no. 4, Corollary to Proposition 4. By no. 7, Theorem 4, H is of the
form H'/aZ, where H' is a subgroup of Z and Z/H' is isomorphic to (Z/aZJ/H
and hence of order c. By Proposition 17 and the Corollary to Proposition 16,
H' = cZ and hence H is monogenous. Finally, H is isomorphic to Z/feZ by
Proposition 18. Conversely, if a = be, then aZ &lt;= C Z for oecZ: the quotient
group (Z/flZ)/(cZ/aZ) is isomorphic to Z/cZ (no. 7, Theorem 4) and hence of
order c (no. 4, Corollary to Proposition 4) and index b (no. 4, Corollary to
Proposition 4) .

Corollary. Every subgroup of a monogenous group is monogenous.

Let a and b be two integers #0. The relation b e aZ is also written: b is a
multiple of a, and also a divides b or a is a divisor ofb.

Definition 16. An integer p &gt; is called prime ifp^l and it admits no divisor &gt; 1
other than p.

Proposition 20. An integer p &gt; is prime if and only if the group ZjpZ is a simple
group.

This follows from Proposition 19.

Corollary. Every commutative simple group is cyclic of prime order.

Let G be such a group. Then G ^ {e} ; let a # e be an element of G. The sub-
group generated by a is normal since G is commutative, it is not reduced to {e}
and hence is equal to G. Therefore G is monogenous and hence isomorphic to a
group of the form Z/pZ with/&gt; &gt; 0, since Z is not simple, and/&gt; is necessarily
prime.

Remark. A finite group G of prime order is necessarily cyclic. G admits no
subgroup other than G and {e} and hence it is generated by every element
*e.

50



MONOGENOUS GROUPS §4.10

Lemma 2. Let a be an integer &gt; 0. By associating with every composition series
(Hi)o=sj«n of the group ZjdZ the sequence (.$i)i &lt;1&lt;n , where s t is the order o/"H i _ 1 /H i ,
a one-to-one correspondence is obtained between the composition series of Z/aZ and the
finite sequences {s { ) of integers &gt;0 such that a = s x . . .s n . The composition series
(H t ) 0&lt;i&lt;n is a Jordan-Holder series if and only if the s t are prime.

If (H,) 0&lt;i&lt;n is a composition series of Z/aZ, it follows, by induction on n,

n

from no. 4, Proposition 4, that a = 11 (H i _ 1 :H i ).

Conversely, let C$i)i &lt;J&lt;n be a sequence of integers &gt;0 such that a = s x . . .s n .
If (Hj) 0&lt;i&lt;n is a composition series of Z/aZ such that (Hj.-^Hj) = s t for

1 &lt; i ^ n, then necessarily ((Z/aZ): H 4 ) =11 ^ as is seen by induction on z,
whence H f = 1 1 1 Sj jZjaZ (Proposition 19), which shows the injectivity of the

mapping in question. We now show its surjectivity. Writing H { = ( 1 1 sAZ\aZ

forO &lt; i ^ «, a composition series of Z/aZ is obtained such that (Hf^: H t ) = s i
(Proposition 19). The second assertion follows from Proposition 20 and no. 7,
Proposition 9.

Let ^ denote the set of prime numbers.

Theorem 7 (decomposition into prime factors). Lei a be a strictly positive integer.
There exists one and only one family (v p (a)) pe y of integers &gt;0 such that the set of
p e *jp with v p (a) ^ is finite and

(5) a = EI /&gt;V a &gt;.

As the group Z/oZ is finite, it admits a Jordan-Holder series. Lemma 2 then
implies that a is a product of prime integers, whence the existence of the family
(v p (a)) ; further, for every family (v p (a) ) pe $ satisfying the conditions of Theorem
7, the integer v p (a) is, for all/&gt; e ^3, equal to the number of factors of a Jordan-
Holder series of Z/aZ isomorphic to Z/pZ (Lemma 2). The uniqueness of the
family (v p (a)) therefore follows from the Jordan-Holder theorem (no. 7,
Theorem 6).

Corollary. Let a and b be two integers &gt;0. Tkenv p (ab) = v p (a) + v p {b).Forato
divide b, it is necessary and sufficient that v p (a) ^ v p (b) for every prime number p.

In any group G, if the (monogenous) subgroup generated by an element
x e G is of finite order d, x is called an element of order d; the number d is there-
fore the least integer &gt; such that x d = e; if the subgroup generated by x is in-
finite, x is said to be of infinite order. These definitions, together with Proposition 4

51



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(no. 4), imply in particular that in a finite group G the order of every element
of G is a divisor of the order of G.

Proposition 21. In a finite group G of order n, x n = efor all x e G.

If/&gt; is the order of x, then n = pq, with q an integer, and hence x n = (x p ) 9 = e.

§ 5. GROUPS OPERATING ON A SET

1. MONOID OPERATING ON A SET

Definition 1. Let M be a monoid, with law written multiplicatively and identity
element denoted by e, and E a set. An action a n&gt;/ a ofMonE is called a left (resp.
right) operation o/M on E iff = Id E an^/ a0 =/« &lt;&gt;/„ (resp. fa =/„ ° fa for all
a, G M.

In other words, a left (resp. right) operation of a monoid M on a set E is a
monoid homomorphism of M into the monoid E E (resp. the opposite monoid of E E )
with composition of mappings. If the law of action corresponding to the action
of M is denoted by left (resp. right) multiplication, the fact that this action is a
left (resp. right) operation may be expressed by the formulae

(1) e.x = x; a. (p.*) = (a(3).* for a, p eM and x eE.

(resp. x.e = x; (#. a) . (3 = *. (a(5) for a, (3 e M and x e E).

Under these conditions, it is also said that M operates on E on the left (resp.
right) and that the corresponding laws of action are laws of left (resp. right)
operation of the monoid M on E.

Let M be a monoid; a set E with a left (resp. right) operation of M on E is
called a left (resp. right) M-set. The monoid M is said to operate on the left
(resp. right) faithfully if the mapping a ■-»■/„ of M into E E is injective.

Examples. (I) Let E be a set; the canonical action of E B on E (§ 3, no. 1,
Example 3) is a left operation.

(2) Let M be a monoid. The left (resp. right) action of M on itself derived
from the law on M (§ 3, no. 3, Example 7) is a left (resp. right) operation
of M on itself. When considering this operation, we say that M operates on
itself by left (resp. right) translation.

Let E be a left (resp. right) M-set and M° the opposite monoid to M. Under
the same action, the monoid M° operates on E on the right (resp. left). The
M°-set obtained is called opposite to the M-set E. The definitions and results
relating to left M-sets carry over to right M°-sets when passing to the opposite
structures.

52



MONOID OPERATING ON A SET § 5. 1

In the rest of this paragraph, we shall consider, unless otherwise stated, only
left M-sets which we shall call simply M-sets. Their law of action will be
denoted by left multiplication.

Let E be a set. Let G be a group operating on E. For all a in G, the element
of E E defined by a is a permutation of E (§ 2, no. 3, Example 2). Being given
an operation of G on E therefore amounts to being given a homomorphism of
G into © E .

In conformity with § 3, no. 3, we make the following definition:

Definition 2. Let M be a monoid and E and E' M-sets. A mapping/ of E into E'
such that, for all x e E and all a e M,/(a.#) = &lt;*•/(*) is called an M-set homo-
morphism (or M-morphism, or mapping compatible with the operations of

M).

The identity mapping of an M-set is an M-morphism. The composition of
two M-morphisms is an M-morphism. For a mapping of one M-set into
another to be an isomorphism, it is necessary and sufficient that it be a bijective
M-morphism and the inverse mapping is then an M-morphism.

Let (E f ) i6l be a family of M-sets and let E be the product set of E 4 . The
monoid M operates on E by a. (x 4 ) ieI = (a.*i) ieI and E, with this action, is an
M-set; let E' be an M-set; a mapping/ of E' into E is an M-morphism if and
only if pr { of is an M-morphism of E' into E { for all i e I.

Let E be an M-set and F a stable subset of E under the action of M; with the
induced law, F is an M-set and the canonical injection F -&gt; E is an M-mor-
phism.

Let E be an M-set and R an equivalence relation on E compatible with the
action of M; the quotient E/R with the quotient action is an M-set and the
canonical mapping E -&gt; E/R is an M-morphism.

Let &lt;f&gt; : M -&gt; M' be a monoid homomorphism, E an M-set and E' an M'-set.
A mapping /of E into E' such that, for all x e E and a e M,

/(a.*) ~ $(«)•/(*)
is called a §-morphism of E into E' (cf. § 3, no. 1).

Extension of a law of operation. Given (for example) three sets F l9 F 2 , F 3 , permuta-
tions /u/2,/3 of F 1} F 2 , F 3 respectively and an echelon F on the base sets F l5
F 2 &gt; F 3 (Set Theory, IV, § 1, no. 1), we can define, proceeding step by step on the
construction of the echelon F, a permutation of F called the canonical extension
of/i,/ a ,/ 3 to F (Set Theory, IV, § 1, no. 2) ; we shall denote it by &lt;J&gt; F C/i,/ a ,/ 3 ).
Then let G be a group and h x a homomorphism of G into the symmetric
group of Fj (i = 1, 2, 3), in other words an operation of G on F { . The mapping
xt-+x F = &lt;j&gt; P (Ai(#), h 2 (x), h 3 (x)) is a homomorphism of G into 6 F , in other
words an operation of G on F, called the extension of h u h 2 , h z to F. Let P be a
subset of F such that, for all * e G, # P (P) = P; let x P be the restriction of x F to

53



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

P; then the mapping x ■-&gt;• x P is an operation of G on P, also called the extension
of h u h 2 , h 3 to P.

For example, let K and L be two echelons on F l5 F 2 , F 3 ; take F to be the set
of subsets of K x L and P to be the set of mappings of K into L, identified
with their graphs. If w e P and * e G, x p (w) is the mapping k h* x tl (w(x^ 1 (k)))
of K into L.

2. STABILIZER, FIXER

Definition 3. Let M be a monoid operating on a set E and A and B subsets o/E. The
set of a. g M such that aAcB (resp. aA = B) is called the transporter (resp. strict
transporter) of A to B. The transporter (resp. strict transporter) of A to A is called the
stabilizer (resp. strict stabilizer) of A. The set of a £ M such that aa = a for all
aeAis called the fixer of A.

An element a of M is said to stabilize (resp. stabilize strictly, resp. fix) a sub-
set A of E if a belongs to the stabilizer (resp. strict stabilizer, resp. fixer) of A.
A subset P of M is said to stabilize (resp. stabilize strictly, resp. fix) a subset A of
E if all the elements of P stabilize (resp. strictly stabilize, resp. fix) A. The
fixer of A is contained in the strict stabilizer of A which itself is contained in the
stabilizer of A.

Proposition 1. Let M be a monoid operating on a set E and A a subset ofE.

(a) The stabilizer, strict stabilizer and fixer of A are submonoids ofM.

(b) Let a be an invertible element ofM; if a belongs to the strict stabilizer (resp.
fixer) of A, so does a -1 .

Let e be the identity element of M ; then ea = a for every element a e A and
therefore e belongs to the fixer of A. Let a and (3 be elements of E which
stabilize A. Then (ap)A = a((3A) cr a A c A and therefore the stabilizer of A
is a submonoid ofM. Similarly for the strict stabilizer and fixer of A, whence
(a). If aA = A, then A = a _1 (aA) = a _1 A. If for all a e A, oca = a, then
a = a -1 (oca) = a -1 a, whence (b).

Corollary. Let G be a group operating on a set E and A be a subset ofE. The strict
stabilizer S and the fixer F of A are subgroups ofGandFisa normal subgroup ofS.

The first assertion follows from the proposition and F is the kernel of the
homomorphism of S into &lt;S A associated with the operation of S on A.

A group G operates faithfully on a set E if and only if the fixer ofE consists of
the identity element of G. The fixer of E is the kernel of the given homomor-
phism of G into &lt;£ E ; this homomorphism is injective if and only if its kernel
consists of the identity element (§ 4, no. 5, Theorem 3).

Let M be a monoid, E an M-set and a an element of E. The fixer, strict
stabilizer and stabilizer of {a} are equal; this monoid is called equally the fixer
or stabilizer of a. The fixer of a subset A of E is the intersection of the fixers of

54



INNER AUTOMORPHISMS § 5.3

the elements of A. a is called an invariant element of E if the fixer of a is the
monoid M. M is said to operate trivially on E if every element of E is invariant.

Proposition 2. Let G be a group operating on a set E and, for all x eE, let S x be the
stabilizer of x. For all a e G, S aA . = aS x a -1 .

If seS x , then owa -1 (oa) = ccsx = ccx, whence aS*a _1 &lt;= S ax . As
x = a-^a*), a -1 S ax a &lt;= S*, whence S ux c: aS^a" 1 .

It is seen similarly that, if A and B are two subsets of E and T is the trans-
porter (resp. strict transporter) of A to B, then the transporter (resp. strict
transporter) of ocA to &lt;xB is equal to aTa -1 .

3. INNER AUTOMORPHISMS

Let G be a group. The set Aut(G) of automorphisms of the group G is a sub-
group of G (§ 4, no. 1 , Example 2) .

Proposition 3. Let G be a group. For every element x of G, the mapping
Int(x):y h-&gt; xyx~ x of G into itself is an automorphism of G. The mapping
Int: #i-&gt; Int(#) of G into Aut(G) is a group homomorphism, whose kernel is the
centre ofG and whose image is a normal subgroup of 'Aut(G).

If x, y and z are elements of G, then (xyx~ 1 )(xzx~ 1 ) = xyzx~ x and hence
Int(*) is an endomorphism of G. For x andy elements ofG,

Int(x) o Int(y) = Int(*y) :

for all zeG, x(yzy~ 1 )x~ 1 = (xy)z(xy)~ 1 . On the other hand, Int(*) is the
identity mapping of G. The mapping Int is therefore a monoid homomorphism
from G to the monoid End(G) of endomorphisms of the group G. As the ele-
ments of G are invertible, the mapping Int takes its values in the set Aut(G) of
invertible elements of End (G) (§ 2, no. 3). Now xyx' 1 = y if and only if x and
y commute and hence Int(*) is the identity mapping of G if and only if * is a
central element. Finally, let a be an automorphism of G and let x e G; then

(2) Int(a(*)) = a ° Int(x) ° a" 1 .

ForyeG,

a.(x).y.x(x)~ 1 = a(*).a(a- 1 (y)).a(*)~ 1 = a(*.a -1 (y).* _1 ).

Hencea.Int(G).a- 1 &lt;= Int(G).

Definition 4. Let G be a group and xeG. The automorphism y t-&gt; xyx' 1 is called the
inner automorphism ofG defined by x and is denoted by Int x.

For x, y e G, we also write x y = y~ x xy = (Inty 1 ) (x).
A subgroup of G is normal if and only if it is stable under all inner auto-
morphisms of G (§ 4, no. 4, Definition 5) . A subgroup of G is called charac-

55



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

teristic if it stable under all automorphisms of G. The centre of a group G is a
characteristic subgroup (formula (2)).

The centre of a group G is not necessarily stable under all endomorphisms
of G (Exercise 22). In particular, the centre of a group with operators is not
necessarily a stable subgroup.

Proposition 4. Let Gbea group, H a characteristic (resp. normal) subgroup ofG and
K a characteristic subgroup ofH. Then Kua characteristic (resp. normal) subgroup ofG.

The restriction to H of an automorphism (resp. inner automorphism) of G is
an automorphism of H and therefore leaves K invariant.

Let G be a group, AcG and b e G. b is said to normalize A if bAb ~ x = A;
b is said to centralize A if, for all a e A, bab -1 = a. Let A and B be subsets of G;
B is said to normalize (resp. centralize) A if every element of B normalizes (resp.
centralizes) A.

The set of g e G which normalize (resp. centralize) A is called the normalizer
(resp. centralizer) of A (cf. § 1, no. 5, Definition 9); it is often denoted by
N G (A) or simply N(A) (resp. C G (A) or G(A)). It is a subgroup of G. When A is
a subgroup of G, N G (A) may be characterized as the largest subgroup of G
which contains A and in which A is normal.

Remarks. (1) The normalizer (resp. centralizer) of A is the strict stabilizer
(resp. fixer) of A when G operates on itself by inner automorphisms. In par-
ticular the centralizer is a normal subgroup of the normalizer.

(2) The set of elements b e G such that bAb -1 c A is a submonoid of
G. Even when A is a subgroup of G, this set is not necessarily a subgroup of
G (Exercise 27).

4. ORBITS

Definition 5. Let G be a group, E a G-set and x e G. An element y eEis conjugate
to x under the operation ofG if there exists an element a e G such that y = ax. The set
of conjugate elements ofxis called the orbit of* in E.

The relation "y is conjugate to x" is an equivalence relation. For x = ex; if
y = ax, then x = a~ x y; ify = ax and z = $y, then z = $ax. The orbits are the
equivalence classes under this relation.

A subset X of E is stable if and only if it is saturated with respect to the rela-
tion of conjugation.

The mapping a &gt;-&gt; ax of G into E is sometimes called the orbital mapping
defined by x. It is a G-morphism ofG (with the operation ofG on itself by left
translation) into E. The image G.x of G under this mapping is the orbit of*.

G is said to operatefreely on E if, for all x e E, the orbital mapping defined by
x is injective or also if the mapping (g, x) h&gt; (gx, x) of G x E into E x E
is injective.

56



ORBITS § 5.4

Examples. (1) Let G be a group and consider the operation of G on itself
by inner automorphisms. Two elements of G which are conjugate under this
operation are called conjugate under inner automorphisms or simply
conjugate. The orbits are called conjugacy classes. Similarly, two subsets H and
H' of G are called conjugate if there exists an element a e G such that
H' = a.H.a -1 , that is if they are conjugate under the extension to 'JP(G)
of the operation of G on itself by inner automorphisms.

(2) *In the space R n , the orbit of a point x under the action of the ortho-
gonal group 0(n, R) is the Euclidean sphere of radius ||*||.*

The stabilizers of two conjugate elements of E are conjugate subgroups of G
(no. 2, Proposition 2).

The quotient set of E under the relation of conjugation is the set of orbits of
E; it is sometimes denoted by E/G or G\E. (Sometimes the notation E/G is
reserved for the case where E is a right G-set and the notation G\E for the case
where E is a left G-set.)

Let G be a group operating on a set E on the right. Let H be a normal sub-
group of G. The group G operates on E/H on the right, the corresponding law
of right action being (xH, g) h&gt; xHg = xgH; under this operation, H operates
trivially, whence a right operation of G/H on E/H. Let &lt;J&gt; be the canonical
mapping of E/H onto E/G; the inverse images under &lt;j&gt; of the points of E/G
are the orbits of G (or of G/H) in E/H. Hence (j&gt; defines when passing to
the quotient a bijection, called canonical, of (E/H)/G = (E/H) /(G/H) onto
E/G.

Let G (resp. H) be a group operating on a set E on the left (resp. right).
Suppose that the actions of G and H on E commute, that is

(g.x).h = g.{x.h) for g e G, x e E and /zeH.

The action of H on E is also a left operation of the opposite group H° to H.
It then follows from § 4, no. 9, Proposition 12 that the mapping which asso-
ciates with the element (g, h) eG x H° the mapping x k&gt; g . x . h of E into itself
is a left operation of G x H° on E. The orbit of an element x e E under this
operation is the set G*H. The set of these orbits is denoted by G\E/H. On
the other hand, the operation of G (resp. H) is compatible with the relation of
conjugation with respect to the operation of H (resp. G) and the set of orbits
G\(E/H) (resp. (G\E)/H) is identified with G\E/H: in the diagram



G\E



\3

\
E/H

G\E/H



57



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(where a, (3, y, 8, s denote the canonical mappings of taking quotients),
yoa= So£J = e.

Let G be a group and H a subgroup of G. Consider the right operation of H
on G by right translation (no. 1, Example 2). The set of orbits G/H is the set of
left cosets modulo H; note that G operates on G/H on the left by the law
(g, xH) h&gt; gxH (cf. no. 5). Similarly, the set of right cosets modulo H is the set
H\G of orbits of the left operation of H on G by left translation. If K is a
subgroup of G containing H and T is a left (resp. right) coset modulo H, then
TK (resp. KT) is a left (resp. right) coset modulo K. The mapping T t-&gt; TK
(resp. T i-&gt; KT) is called the canonical mapping of G/H into G/K (resp. of H\G
into K\G). It is surjective.

Let G be a group and H and K two subgroups of G. Let H operate on G on
the left by left translation and K on the right by right translation; these two
operations commute, which allows us to consider the set H\G/K. The elements
of" H\G/K are called the double cosets of G modulo H and K. When K = H, we
simply say double cosets modulo H. For the canonical mapping of G/H onto
H\G/H to be a bijection, it is necessary and sufficient that H be a normal sub-
group of G.

5. HOMOGENEOUS SETS

Definition 6. Let G be a group. An operation of G on a set E is called transitive if
there exists an element xeE whose orbit is E. A G-set E is called homogeneous if the
operation of G on E is transitive.

It is also said that G operates transitively on E; or that E is a homogeneous set
under G. It amounts to the same to say that E is non-empty and that, for all
elements x and y of E, there exists an element a e G such that cc.x = y.

Example. If E is a G-set, each orbit of E, with the induced operation, is a
homogeneous set under G.

Let G be a group and H a subgroup of G. Consider the set G/H of left cosets
modulo H. The group G operates on G/H on the left by (g, xH) i-&gt; gxH. Let N
be the normalizer of H. The group N operates on G/H on the right by
(xH, n) h-&gt; xHn = xriH.. This operation induces on H the trivial operation and
hence, on passing to the quotient, N/H operates on G/H on the right. Let
§: (N/H)° -&gt;• €5 G/H be the homomorphism corresponding to this operation.
Proposition 5. With the above notation, G/H is a homogeneous G-set. The mapping
cj&gt; induces an isomorphism of (N/H)° onto the group of automorphisms of the G-set
G/H.

The orbit in G/H of the element e = H is G/H, whence the first assertion.
We now prove the second. If n e N defines by right translation the identity
mapping on G/H, then e.n = e\ that is H.n = H, whence n e H. Therefore

58



HOMOGENEOUS SETS § 5.5

N/H operates faithfully on G/H on the right and &lt;{&gt; is injective. The left
operation of G and right operation of N/H on G/H commute and hence the
operators of N/H define G-morphisms of G/H into itself, which are necessarily
G-automorphisms since they are bijective. Therefore (j&gt; takes its values in the
group O of G-automorphisms of G/H. We show that the image of &lt;j&gt; is O. Let
fe O. By transporting the structure, the stabilizer o£f(e) in G is equal to the
stabilizer of e and hence to H. Let n e G be such that/(&lt;?) = ne. The stabilizer
of ne in G is nH« -1 (no. 2, Proposition 2), whence nHn" 1 = H and n e N. For
every element #H of G/H,/(*H) = f(x.e) = x.f{e) — xriH = xHn and/ co-
incides with the mapping denned by n.

Remarks. (1) Let G be a group, H a subgroup of G and &lt;j&gt;: G -&gt; @ G/H the
homomorphism corresponding to the operation of G on G/H. The kernel of
(J) is the intersection of the conjugates of H (no. 2, Proposition 2). It is also
the largest normal subgroup contained in H (no. 3). In particular, G oper-
ates faithfully on G/H if and only if the intersection of the conjugates of H
reduces to {e}.

(2) Let G be a group and H and K subgroups such that H is a normal
subgroup of K. Then K/H operates on the G-set G/H on the right and the
canonical mapping of G/H onto G/K defines on passing to the quotient a
G-set isomorphism (G/H)/(K/H) -&gt; G/K (cf. no. 4).

Proposition 6. Let G be a group, E a homogeneous G-set, aeE,H the stabilizer of a
and K a subgroup o/G contained in H. There exists one and only one G-morphismf
ofGjK into E such thatf(e.K) = a.I/K = H,fis an isomorphism.

If/ is a solution, then/(#.K) = x.a for all x in G, whence the uniqueness;
we show the existence. The orbital mapping defined by a is compatible with the
equivalence relation y e xK. on G. For, if y = xk, k e K, then

y.a = xk.a = x.a.

A mapping/ is thus derived of G/K into H which satisfies /( x. K) = x.a for
all x in G. This mapping is a G-morphism and /(K) = a. This mapping is
surjective for its image is a non-empty stable subset of E. Suppose now that
K = H and let us show that/is injective. If/(* . H) = f(y . H) , then x.a = y.a,
whence x~ x y.a = a and x _1 y e H, whence x.H = y.H.

Theorem 1 . Let G be a group.

(a) Every homogeneous G-set is isomorphic to a homogeneous G-set of the form G/H
where H is a subgroup of G.

(b) Let H and H' be two subgroups ofG. The G-sets G/H and G/H' are isomorphic
if and only if H and H' are conjugate.

As a homogeneous G-set is non-empty, assertion (a) follows from Proposition
6. We show (b). Let/: G/H -&gt;■ G/H' be a G-set isomorphism. The subgroup H
is the stabilizer of H and hence, by transport of structure, the stabilizer of an

59



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

element of G/H'. The subgroups H and H' are therefore conjugate (no. 2,
Proposition 2). If H' = ocHa -1 , H' is the stabilizer of the element a.H of G/H
(no. 2, Proposition 2) and hence G/H' is isomorphic to G/H (Proposition 6).

Examples. (1) Let E be a non-empty set. The group €? E operates transitively
on E. If x and y are two elements of E, the mapping x: E — &gt; E such that
t(#) = y, x(y) = x and t(z) = z for z ^ x, y, is a permutation of E. Let
a e E. The stabilizer of a is identified with €&gt; F , where F = E — {a}. The
homogeneous G-set E is thus isomorphic to €&gt; E /&amp; F .

(2) Let E be a set of n elements and (p t ) ie i a finite family of integers &gt;

such that Z,/»j = n. Let X be the set of partitions (F t ) ieI of E such that

Card(F t ) = p t for all i. The group &lt;S E operates transitively on X. The

stabilizer H of an element (F 4 ) leI of X is canonically isomorphic to 1 1 &amp; Fi

and is hence of order I 1^!. Applying Theorem 1 and § 4, no. 4, Corollary to

lei

Proposition 4, a new proof is obtained of the fact that

Card(X) =



n* 1



In particular, take I = {1, 2, . . ., r}, E = {1, 2, . . ., n},

F, = {pi + • • • + Pt-x + 1,. . ., A + • • • + Pi}
for 1 &lt; i s? r. Let S be the set of t e 6 E such that t| fj is increasing for
1 &lt; i &lt; r. If (G 1} . . . , G r ) e X there exists one and only one t e S
which maps (F l5 . . ., F r ) to (Gi, . . ., G r ). In other words, each left coset of
@ E modulo H meets S in one and only one point.

(3) *Let n be an integer ^ 1. The orthogonal group 0(n, R) operates
transitively on the unit sphere S n _! in R n . The stabilizer of the point
(0, ...,0, 1) is identified with the orthogonal group 0(« — 1, R). The
homogeneous 0(«, R)-set S n _ x is thus isomorphic to 0(«, R)/0(n — 1, R).*

6. HOMOGENEOUS PRINCIPAL SETS

Definition 7. Let G be a group. An operation of G on a set E is called simply
transitive if there exists an element xofE such that the orbital mapping defined by x is a
bijection. A set E, together with a simply transitive left action ofGonE, is called a left
homogeneous principal G-set (or left homogeneous principal set under G).

It amounts to the same to say that G operates freely and transitively on E,
or also that there exists an element x e E such that the orbital mapping defined
by x is an isomorphism of the G-set G (where G operates by left translation)
onto E; or also that the two following conditions are satisfied:

(i) E is non-empty.

(ii) for all elements x and y of E, there exists one and only one element
a e G such that ouc = y.

60



PERMUTATION GROUPS OF A FINITE SET § 5.7

Condition (ii) is also equivalent to the following condition:

(iii) the mapping (a, x) (-&gt;■ (oca;, x) is a bijection of G x E onto E x E.

We leave to the reader the task of defining right homogeneous principal G-
sets.

Examples. (1) Let G operate on itself by left (resp. right) translation. Thus
a left (resp. right) homogeneous principal G-set structure is defined on G,
which is sometimes denoted by G s (resp. G d ).

(2) Let E be a homogeneous set under a commutative group G. If G
operates faithfully on E, the latter is a homogeneous principal G-set.

(3) Let E and F be two isomorphic sets with structures of the same
species and let Isom(E, F) be the set of isomorphisms of E onto F (with the
given structures). The group Aut(E) of automorphisms of E (with the given
structure) operates on Isom(E, F) on the right by the law (a,f) i-&gt;/o &lt;j and
Isom(E, F) is a right homogeneous principal Aut(E)-set. Similarly, the
group Aut(F) operates on Isom(E, F) on the left by the law (a,/) *-*■ a o f
and Isom(E, F) is a left homogeneous principal Aut(F)-set.

(4) *A homogeneous principal set under the additive group of a vector
space is called an qffine space (cf. II, § 9, no. 1).*

The group of automorphisms of the homogeneous principal G-set G 8
(Example 1) is the group of right translations of G which is identified with G°
(no. 5, Proposition 5). Let E be a homogeneous principal G-set and a an
element of E. The orbital mapping &lt;o defined by a is an isomorphism of the
G-set G s onto E. By transporting the structure an isomorphism ty a is derived
of G° onto Aut(E). It should be noted that «|^ in general depends on a; more
precisely, for a e G,

(3) ty M = &lt;\&gt; a o Int Q o( a ) = &lt;J/ fl o Int(a- 1 ).

For, writing 8 a for the translation ^h-hoii G,



and



ty a (x) =(0 a o8 x o( ) ) |x 1 , X E G,



whence

&lt;kxa(*) =W a o8 a o8 Jt o8- 1 oO)- 1 = (O a o 8 B -lj„ o CO " 1 = ^(a -1 **).

7. PERMUTATION GROUPS OF A FINITE SET

If E is a finite set with n elements, the symmetric group €5 E (§ 4, no. 1) is a
finite group of order n\. When E is the interval (1, n) of the set N of natural
numbers, the corresponding symmetric group is denoted by 6 n ; the symmetric
group of any set with n elements is isomorphic to © n .

61



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Definition 8. Let E be a finite set, £ e 6 E a permutation o/E and £ the subgroup of
&lt;S E generated by £. £ is called a cycle z/", under the operation of^onE, there exists one
and only one orbit which is not reduced to a single element. This orbit is called the support
ofX

Let £ be a cycle. The support supp(£) of £ is the set of x e E such
that Z,(x) 7^ x.

The order of a cycle £ is equal to the cardinal of its support. The subgroup
£ generated by Z, operates transitively and faithfully on supp(^). As £ is com-
mutative, supp(^) is a principal set under £ (no. 6, Example 2) and hence
Card(supp(C)) = Card®.

Lemma 1. Let (£i)iei fo a family of cycles whose supports arepairwise disjoint. Then the
£ { are pairwise permutable. Let &lt;r = 1 1 £ 4 and a be the subgroup generated by a. Then

a(x) — £j(#) for x g Sj, i e I, and a(x) = xfor x $ U S ( . Tfo mapping i *-&gt; S ( w a
bijection of I onto the set ofa-orbits not consisting of a single element.

Let Z, and £' be two cycles whose supports are disjoint. If

x£supp(£) Usupp(S'),

then ££'(#) = £'£(#) = #. If * belongs to the support of £, then £'(*) = x and
£(#) belongs to the support of £, whence KX ( x ) — £'£(*) — £(*)• Similarly
when x belongs to the support of £', then £'£(#) = ££'(*) = £'(#)• Hence
££' = £'£. Therefore the £ 4 are pairwise permutable and, for i e I and # E S j5
a (x) = ^(x) e S { . The mappings a and £ f coincide on S i5 hence S t is stable under
a and the subgroup of €&gt; Sl generated by the restriction of a to S 4 operates
transitively on S^ therefore Sj is a a-orbit. As the S t are non-empty and are
pairwise disjoint, the mapping i i-&gt; S 4 is injective. As U Sj is the set of x such
that g(x) ^ x, every a-orbit not consisting of a single element is one of the Sj.

Proposition 7. Let E be a finite set and a a permutation ofE. There exists one and only
one finite set C of cycles satisfying the two following conditions :

(a) the supports of the elements ofC are pairwise disjoints;

(b) a = 1 1 £ (the elements of C being pairwise permutable by Lemma 1).

Let a be the subgroup generated by c and let S be the set of 5-orbits not con-
sisting of a single element. For s e S, write £ s (#) = g(x) if* e s and £ s (#) = x if

x $ s. For all s e S, £ s is a cycle whose support is s and ey = 1 1 £ s , as is seen by

applying the two sides to any element of E. The uniqueness of C follows from
Lemma 1.

62



PERMUTATION GROUPS OF A FINITE SET § 5.7

Definition 9. A cycle of order 2 is called a transposition.

Let x and y be two distinct elements of E. Let x Xt y denote the unique trans-
position with support {#, y}.

For every permutation cr of E the permutation cr. z Xt y . a~ x is a transposition
whose support is (cr(*), cr(y)}. Hence:

( 4 ) &lt;*-f*.v&lt;* -1 = T a(*),o(y)-

Transpositions thus form a conjugacy class in the group 6 E .

Proposition 8. Let E be a finite set. The group 6 E is generated by the transpositions.

For every permutation a let F CT be the set of x e E such that a(x) = x. We
show by descending induction on p that every permutation a such that
Card(F a ) = p is a product of transpositions. If/&gt; ^ Card(E), the permutation
a is the identity mapping of E ; it is the product of the empty family of trans-
positions. If p &lt; Card(E), suppose that the property is proved for every per-
mutation a' such that Card(F a &lt;) &gt; p. Now E — F a # 0; let «eE-F a
and y e a(x). Then y ^ x and y e E — F G . Let a = r x&gt;y .c. The set F a / con-
tains F a and x and hence Gard(F ,) &gt; Card(F ) = p. By the induction
hypothesis cr' is a product of transpositions and hence a = t Xf y . a' is a product
of transpositions.

Proposition 9. Let n be an integer ^ 0. The group 6 rt is generated by the transpo-
sitions (T l( | + !)!&lt;!&lt;„_!•

By virtue of Proposition 8, it suffices to show that every transposition
t p. as 1 ^ p &lt; q ^ n, belongs to the subgroup H generated by the t m+1 ,
1 &lt; i ^ n — 1. We show this by induction on q — p. For q — p = 1, it is
obvious. If q — p &gt; 1, then (formula (4)) T p&gt;q = T a _ li ,T J , &gt; ,_ 1 T,_ ljfl . By the
induction hypothesis Tpj.^H and therefore t p&gt;q e H.

If cr e n , every ordered pair (i,j) of elements of (1, ri\ such that i &lt; j and
er(z') &gt; cr(ji) is called an inversion of a. Let v(ar) denote the number of inversions
of cr.

Let P be the additive group of mappings from Z n to Z. For fe P and
cr e S n , let cr/be the element of P defined by

(5) °f{Zl, •■-, Zn) =/(Za(l)&gt; • • ■, Za(n))-

The action of 6 n on P thus defined is an operation; for all cr, tgS„ and
/eP,«/-/and

W&lt;5D)( Z 1&gt; • • •, *n) = &lt;jf(**l). ■ • •&gt; Z x(n)) =/(*to&lt;1&gt;, ■ • •» 2-raOi))
= ((™)/)(Zl,...,2 n ).

Formula (5) shows that o(—f) = —off or a £ @ n and/"e P.

63



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Let p be the element of P defined by

(6) p( Zl ,...,z n ) = \lizj - z,).

Lemma 2. p ^ a/w/ a/&gt; = (- l) v(G) /or a e €5 B .

p(\. 2, . . ., n) =1 1 (j — i) # and hence p # 0. On the other hand, if



a G 6 n , then

&lt;#(Zl, • • •&gt; z n) = P( z oa)&gt; • • •» 2 a(n)) = -j^j (^otf) ~ 2 0(J) ).

Let C be the set of ordered pairs (i,j) such that 1 ^ i ^ n, 1 ^ j &lt; n,
i &lt; j. A permutation 6 is defined on C by setting 8(t,j) = {a{i), a(j)) if
(t, j) is not an inversion, 0(z,j) = (a(j)&gt; a (i)) ^ (hj) 1S an inversion. This
implies op = (-l) v(c0 /&gt;.

Theorem 2. Let E fo a finite set. There exists one and only one homomorphism efrom
@ n to the multiplicative group {—1, +1} such that e(r) = — 1 for every transposition

T.

The uniqueness follows from Proposition 8. We show the existence. By
transporting the structure, it may be assumed that E = (1, ri). Using the above
notation, let e(o) = (-l) v(a) . Then (Lemma 2)

c(o'p) = o(t{J)p) = e(a')(ap) = S (&lt;y&gt;(a)/&gt;.
On the other hand,

a ( a 'p) = (aa')p = s{oo')p.

Asp # —p, it follows that e(acr') = s(a)s(a') and thus e is a homomorphism.
We now show that, for every transposition t, e(r) = — 1. v(x n _ 1&gt;n ) = 1,
whence s(T n _ ln ) = —1. As every transposition t is conjugate to x n _ lfn and
the group {— 1, + 1} is commutative, e(t) = e(f n _ 1&gt;n ) = — 1.

Definition 10. In the notation of Theorem 2, the number e(a) (also denoted e„) is
called the signature of the permutation a. The kernel of the homomorphism e is called the
alternating group of E.

a is called even (resp. odd) if e(a) = 1 (resp. e(a) = —1). The alternating
group of E is denoted by 2t E . It is a normal subgroup of &lt;S E . When E = (1, n),
it is simply denoted by Ql n . When the cardinal n of E is ^2, it is a subgroup of
index 2 and hence of order n!/2. It can be shown that, for n = 3 orn &gt; 5, the
group 2t n is a simple group (cf. Exercise 16).

64



EXTENSIONS §6.1

Example. If a is a cycle of order d, then

z(a) = (-iy-\
The number of inversions of the permutation

(1,2,3,. ..,rf).-*(rf,l,2,...,rf-l)
is equal to d — 1.



§ 6. EXTENSIONS, SOLVABLE GROUPS, NILPOTENT

GROUPS



Throughout this paragraph, the group laws are, unless expressly mentioned
otherwise, written multiplicatively.

1. EXTENSIONS

Definition 1 . Let F and G be two groups. An extension of G by F is a triple
&amp; = (E, i,p), where E is a group, i an injective homomorphism ofF into E and p a
surjective homomorphism ofE onto G such that Im(z') = Ker(p). A homomorphism
s: G -&gt; E (resp. r: E -* F) such that p° s = Id G (ra/&gt;. r o i = Id P ) w called a
section (resp. retraction) of the extension $.

An extension &amp; = (E, i, p) of G by F is often denoted by the diagram
S\ F -&gt; E -4- G, in which i and /» are sometimes omitted if no confusion can
arise. It is sometimes said simply that the group E is an extension of G by F.

For a group E to be an extension of G by F, it is necessary and sufficient that
it contain a normal subgroup F' isomorphic to F such that the quotient group
E/F' is isomorphic to G.

An extension S\ F -&gt; E -4- G is called central if the image i (F) is contained in
the centre of E; this is only possible if F is commutative.

Let &lt;f : F 4- E 4- G and €' : F U E' 4- G be two extensions of G by F. A
morphism of &amp; into $' is a homomorphism u : E -&gt; E' such that /&gt;' o u = p and
uoi = i', or, in other words, such that the following diagram is commutative:



\



E.



G



/'



E'

65



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Proposition 1 . Let &amp;: F -4- E -4 G and £' : F -4 E' -4 G be extensions ofGbyF.
Ifu: E -&gt; E' is a morphism of$ into $' , uis an isomorphism ofE onto E' andu -1 is a
morphism of S' into €.

Let x e E be such that u(x) = e. Then/&gt;(#) = p'(u(x)) — e, whence x e i(F).
hety gF be such that x = i(y); then i'{y) = u(i(y)) = e. As i' is injective,
y = e and x = e. Therefore u is injective. By virtue of § 4, no. 6, Corollary 1 to
Proposition 7, u is surjective since u{i (F)) = i'(F). The last assertion is immedi-
ate.

In other words, the extensions $ and S" are isomorphic if and only if there
exists a morphism of $ into $' .

Let F and G be two groups and write E = F x G; let i: F -» E be the
canonical injection and p : E — &gt; G be the canonical projection. Every exten-
sion of G by F isomorphic to the extension &lt;^ : F -» E -&gt; G is called a fmrco/

Proposition 2. Let $: F — &gt; E -4- G fo a« extension o/GbyF. The following con-
ditions are equivalent :

(i) $ is a trivial extension;

(ii) &lt;^ Aay a retraction r;

(iii) &lt;^ has a section s such that s{G) is contained in the centralizer qfi(F).

Clearly (i) implies (ii) and (iii). If (ii) holds, the mapping (r, p) : E -&gt; F x G
is a morphism of $ into &lt;? , whence (i). If (iii) holds, the homomorphism of
F x G into E corresponding to (i, s) (§ 4, no. 9, Proposition 12) is a mor-
phism of &lt;f into to, whence (i).

It may be that an extension S : F — &gt;• E — &gt; G is not trivial and yet the
group E is isomorphic to F x G (Exercise 6) .

Definition 2. Let F and G be two groups and x a homomorphism of G into the
automorphism group of F. Write r(g)(f) = 9 f for geG and /eF. The set
F x G with the law of composition

(i) ((/, g), CA g')) - (/&gt; g) -, (/', £') = (/•'/'. &amp;0

is ftz/^rf the external semi-direct product of G by F relative to t.

The external semi-direct product of G by F relative to t is denoted by
F x T G.

Proposition 3. The external semi-direct product F x T G is a group. The mappings
*:F-&gt;F x r G defined by i(f) = (f,e), p-.F x t G^G defined by p(f g) ~g,
and s: G -&gt; F x x G defined by s(g) = (e, g) are group homomorphisms. The triple
(F x T G, i, p) is an extension ofGbyF and s is a section of the extension.

66



EXTENSIONS §6.1

We have :

((/, g) -x (/', 5')) ., (/", 5") = (/• 9 f, gg') ., (/", «")

= (/•'/'. "r,«Y);

(/, *) -x (CA /) - CA /)) = (/&gt; ^) - (/"/", /*")

= {f.°{f'- 9 'f"),gg'g")-

Now 9 (/' . ff /") = °f . B9 'f", which shows that the law of composition defined
by (1) is associative. The element (e, e) is the identity under this law. The ele-
ment (/, g) admits as inverse i 9 ' 1 /' 1 , g' 1 )- Hence the law of composition on
F x T G is a group law. The other assertions are immediate.

Using the notation of Proposition 3, &lt;^ T will denote the extension

F-VF x t G4.G.

Let $' : F -4- E' A- G be an extension of G by F and s' : G -&gt; E' a section of
$' . We define an operation t of G on the group F by:

(2) i'«g,f)) = s'(g)i'(f)s'(g)-i « lnt(s'(g))(i'(f)).

Proposition 4. With the above notation, there exists one and only one isomorphism u of
&lt;^ T onto $' such that u o s = s'.

(f&gt;g) = (fy e ) 'x ( e &gt;g) = *(/) ~( s (g)- Therefore, if u is a solution to the
problem, of necessity u(f g) = i'if)-s'(g), whence the uniqueness of u. We
prove the existence. We write u(f g) = i'(f) -s'(g). Then

&lt;f,g)-&lt;f,g') = i'WigYif'Vig')

= i'{fW{g)i'{f'V{g)- X V{gV{g')
= i'{fV{&lt;g,f'))-s'{gV{g')
= i'(f-&lt;g,f')).s'(gg')
= u«f,g).r(f&gt;g'))-

Therefore, u is a homomorphism of F x T G into E'. Obviously u°i = i\

p' o u = p and « o s = s'.

Remark. The definition of the operation t by formula (2) depends on the
extension &amp; ' and the section s'. When F is commutative, the operation t
does not depend on s'. For Int(s'(g)) | i'(F) depends then only on the coset
of s'(g) mod. t'(F).

More generally, let &amp; : F — &gt; E — &gt; G be an extension of G by a commuta-
tive group F (it is not assumed that &amp; admits a section). The group E
operates on F by inner automorphisms, this image is trivial on the image of
F and hence defines an operation of G on F. If &amp; admits a section, this
operation is that defined by formula (2).

Corollary. Let G be a group and H and K two subgroups of G such that H is

67



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

normal, HnK = {«} and H.K = G. Let t be the operation of K on H by inner
automorphisms of G. The mapping (h, k) &gt;-&gt; hk is an isomorphism ofHx x K onto
G.

Under the hypotheses of this corollary, G is said to be the semi-direct product of
KbyH.

Examples. (1) Let G be a group and E a homogeneous principal G-set;
let T denote the automorphism group of G. Let A be the set of permuta-
tions/of E with the following property:

There exists y e T such that / is a y-morphism of E into E (that is,
f(gb) = Y(*)/(*) for b e E and geG).

The above formula f(gb) = y(g)f(b) shows that if fe A there exists a
unique y e T such that /is a y-morphism, we shall denote it by /&gt;(/).

Let/,/' be in A, y = p(f), y' = p(f'). Then, for alU e E and all geG,

(f'°f)(gb) =f'(y(g)f{b)) = YMg))f'(f(b))
which proves that/' o/e A and that j&amp;(/' o/) = p{f')p(f). On the other
hand,/^- 1 ^)/- 1 ^)) = **, whence/" 1 ^) = Y^U)/" 1 ^) and/^eA.
Thus A is a subgroup of 6 E and /&gt; is a homomorphism of A into Y. The ker-
nel of p is the set Aut G (E) of automorphisms of the G-set E.

We fix a e E. We have defined in § 5, no. 6 an isomorphism &lt;]&gt;a of G°
onto Aut G (E) such that ty a {x) (ga) = gxa for all g, x in G. On the other hand,
for y e r, let s a (y) be the permutation of E defined by s a (y)(ga) = y(g)a
for all g e G ; it is immediately verified that s a is a homomorphism of T
into A such that p o s a — Id T . Thus G° — ° A -A- T is an extension of T by G°
and s a is a section of this extension. This extension and this section define an
operation of T on G°, s a (T) acting on 4&gt;a(G°) by inner automorphisms; we
write this operation exponentially. We show that this operation is the natural
operation (§ 3, no. 1, Example 3) : for x, g in G and y e T,

(U y x))(ga) = (s a (y) o &lt;],„(*) o* (y)-i)(£ fl )

= (* B (Y) ° *aW)(Y- 1 (^)a) = ^(YKY- 1 ^)**)
= SY(*)fl = i&gt;a(y(x))ga

whence y x= y(x).

Proposition 4 then shows that A is isomorphic to the semidirect product of
T = Aut(G) by G° under the natural operation of Aut(G) on G°. Note that
the isomorphism which we have constructed depends in general on the
choice of the element a e E.

(2) *Let A be a commutative ring. The upper triangular group T(n, A)
is the semi-direct product of the diagonal subgroup D(n, A) by the upper
strict triangular group Ti(n, A). #

2. COMMUTATORS

Definition 3. Let G be a group and x andy two elements ofG. The element x~ 1 y~ 1 xy
ofGis called the commutator of x andy.

68



COMMUTATORS § 6.2

(x, y) is used to denote the commutator of x and y. Then obviously

(y,x) = {x,y)-\

For x and y to commute it is necessary and sufficient that (x, y) — e. More
generally,

xy = yx(x,y).
On the other hand we write

(3) x y = y- x xy = x(x, y) = (y,x~ x )x.

As the mapping x &lt;-*■ x y is the inner automorphism Int(y -1 ), (x, yf = (X s , y s )
for all x, y, ze G.

For x, y, z e G, we prove the following relations:

(4) (x, yz) = (x, z) . (x, yf = (*, z) . (z, {y, x)) . (x, y)
(4 bis) (xy, z) = (x, z) y . {y, z) = {x, z) . ((x, z), y) . (y, z)

(5) (*», (y, 2)) . (y, (z, y)) . (z*, (at, y)) = «

(6) (x, yz) . (z, xy) . (y, zx) = ;
(6 bis) (xy, z) . (yz, x) . (zx, y) = e.

Now

(x,yz) = x- 1 z- 1 y~ 1 xyz = (x, z)z~ 1 x- 1 y- 1 xyz = (x, z)(x,y) s
= (x,z)(z,(x,y)- l )(x,y)

by (3), which proves (4). Formula (4 bis) follows similarly. On the other
hand,

(x*,(y,z))= (x»)-\z,y)(xv)(y,z)

= y~ 1 x- 1 yz- 1 y- 1 zyy- 1 xyy- 1 z- 1 yz
= (yzy ~ x xy) - x (zxz~ x yz) .
Then writing u = yzy~ x xy, v = z*z -1 Ary and w = xyx~ 1 zx, we obtain

(x*,(y,z)) = u-H.
By cyclically permuting x, y, z, we deduce (y z , (z, x)) = v~ x w and

(•z*&gt; (*,#)) = w- x u,
which immediately imply (5). Finally, (6) follows by multiplying together the
two sides in the three formulae obtained by cyclically permuting x, y, z in the
formula (x,yz) - x~ 1 z- 1 y- 1 xyz = (yzx)- x (xyz), and similarly for (6 bis).

If A and B are two subgroups of G, (A, B) denotes the subgroup generated by
the commutators (a, b) with a e A and b e B.f Then (A, B) = {e} if and only if
A centralizes B. (A, B) &lt;= A if and only if B normalizes A. If A and B are normal
(resp. characteristic), so is (A, B).

f We here reject the notational convention made in § 1, no 1 of extending a law
of composition to subsets.

69



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Proposition 5. Let A, B, C be three subgroups ofG.

(i) The subgroup A normalizes the subgroup (A, B).

(ii) If the subgroup (B, C) normalizes A, the subgroup (A, (B, C)) is generated by
the elements {a, (b, c)) with aeA,beB and ceC

(iii) If A, B and G are normal, then

(A,(B,C))&lt;=(C,(B,A)).(B,(G,A)).

By (4 bis), for a, a' e A and b e B,

{a,by = (aa',b).{a',b)- 1 ,

whence (i). Suppose now that (B, G) normalizes A. For aeA, b sB, ceC and
x 6 G, (4) implies

(a, (A, c).x) = {a, x).{x, {{b, c), a))(a, {b, c))
and ({b, c), a) e A since (B, C) normalizes A, whence by induction on p the fact

that I a, 11 (b u q)), for b t e B, q e C, belongs to the subgroup generated by the

elements of the form (a, (b, c)). If finally A, B and C are normal, so are the sub-
groups (A, (B, C)), (G, (B, A)) and (B, (C, A)). It therefore suffices by (ii) to
show that

(a,(*,*))e(C,(B,A)).(B,(C,A))

for all a e A, b e B and c e C. Now by (5), writing a b ~ % = u

(a, {b, c)) = ((«*), (b, c)) = (c\ (u, b))~\{b\ (e, u))~\

whence (iii).

Definition 4. Let G be a group. The subgroup generated by the commutators of ele-
ments ofG is called the derived group ofG.

The derived group of G is thus the subgroup (G, G). It is also denoted by
D(G). By an abuse of language, it is sometimes called the commutator group ofG
although it is in general distinct from the set of commutators of elements of G
(Exercise 16). D(G) = {&lt;?} if and only if G is commutative.

Proposition 6. Letf: G -&gt; G' be a group homomorphism. Thenf(D(G)) &lt;= D(G').
Iff is surjective, the homomorphism ofD(G) into D(G') the restriction off is surjective.

The image under /of a commutator of elements of G is a commutator of
elements ofG'. If/ is surjective, the image under/ of the set of commutators of
G is the set of commutators of G'. The proposition thus follows from § 4,
no. 3, Corollary 3 to Proposition 2.

Corollary 1. The derived group of a group G is a characteristic subgroup ofG. In
particular it is a normal subgroup ofG.

70



LOWER CENTRAL SERIES, NILPOTENT GROUPS § 6.3

Corollary 2. Let G be a group. The quotient group G/D(G) is commutative. Let
~k: G — &gt; G/D(G) be the canonical homomorphism. Every homomorphism f of G into a
commutative group G' can be expressed uniquely in the form f — f o 7c, where
f: G/D(G) -^G'isa homomorphism.

Now w(D(G)) = {&lt;?}. As 7t is surjective, it follows that D(G/D(G)) = {«},
whence the first assertion. The second follows from § 4, no. 4, Proposition 5.

Corollary 3. Let Hbe a subgroup ofG. The following conditions are equivalent:

(i) H=&gt;D(G);

(ii) H is a normal subgroup and G/H is commutative.

(ii) =&gt; (i) by Corollary 2 and (i) =&gt; (ii) by § 4, no. 7, Theorem 4, since
every subgroup of a commutative group is normal.

Corollary 4. Let G be a group and X a subset ofG which generates G. The group
D(G) is the normal subgroup ofG generated by the commutators of elements ofX.

Let H be the normal subgroup of G generated by the commutators of ele-
ments of X and §: G-&gt;G/H the canonical homomorphism. The set &lt;j&gt;(X)
generates G/H. The elements of &lt;j&gt;(X) are pairwise permutable and hence H is
commutative (§ 4, no. 3, Corollary 2 to Proposition 2). Hence (Corollary 3) H
contains D(G). On the other hand, obviously H &lt;= D(G).

Remarks. (1) Corollary 2 can also be expressed by saying that G/D(G),
together with iz, is a solution of the universal mapping problem for G,
relative to commutative groups and homomorphisms from G to commuta-
tive groups.

(2) Under the hypotheses of Corollary 4, the subgroup generated by the
commutators of elements of X is contained in D(G) but is not in general
equal to D(G) (cf. Exercise 15e).

Examples. (1) If G is a non-commutative simple group, then D(G) = G.
Therefore every homomorphism of G into a commutative group is trivial.
(2) The derived group of the symmetric group @ n is the alternating
group 2t n . For 21 n is generated by the products of two transpositions; if
t = T Xty and t' = r x &gt;,y' are two transpositions, let o be a permutation such
thata(*') = xando(y') = y. Then 1' = a'^oandn' = t _1 t' = t~ 1 ct~ 1 tct
is a commutator. Hence 2t n c D(6 n ). As 6 n /2t„ is commutative, 2l n =&gt; D(6 n )
(Corollary 3).

3. LOWER CENTRAL SERIES, NILPOTENT GROUPS

Let G be a group, H a subgroup of G and K a normal subgroup of G. The
image of H in G/K is contained in the centre of G/K if and only if (G, H) &lt;= K.

Definition 5. Let G be a group. The lower central series of G is the sequence
(C n (G)) n&gt;1 of subgroups ofG defined inductively by:

C X (G) = G, C n + 1 (G) = (G, C"(G)).

71



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Let/: G-&gt;G' be a group homomorphism. It is seen, by induction on «,
that /(G n (G)) &lt;= C n (G') and that, if/ is surjective, /(G n (G)) = G n (G').
In particular, for all n ^ 1, C 2 (G) is a characteristic (and hence normal) sub-
group of G. For all n £s 1, C n (G)/C n + 1 (G) is contained in the centre of
G/C» +1 (G).

Let (Gj, G 2 , • • .) be a decreasing sequence of normal subgroups of G such
that (1) G x = G; (2) for all i, Gj/G ( + 1 is contained in the centre of G/G J + 1 .
Then C'(G) &lt;= G i5 as is seen by induction on i.

Now
(7) (G m (G), C n (G)) c C m+n (G).

For, if this relation is denoted by (F m&gt;n ), it follows from (F m&gt;n ), by no. 2, Prop-
osition 5, that

(G»(G), C» +1 (G)) c (G, (G»(G), C"(G))).(C»(G), (G, C«(G)))

c C m+n+1 (G).(C m+1 (G), C n (G)).

Hence ((F m#B ) and (F m + liB )) =&gt; (F m&gt;B + 1 ). As (F m&gt;1 ) and (F 1&gt;n ) are obvious
(F Wf n ) follows by induction.

Definition 6. A group G is called nilpotent if there exists an integer n such that
C l + 1 (G) = {&lt;?}. The least integer n such that G n + 1 (G) = {e} is called the nilpotency
class of a nilpotent group G.

If n e N, a group of nilpotency class n is called a nilpotent group of class n.
It is sometimes said that the nilpotency class of a group G is finite if G is nil-
potent.

Examples. (1) A group is nilpotent of class (resp. &lt; 1) if and only if it
consists of the identity element (resp. is commutative) .

(2) *For every commutative ring A and every integer n ^ 1, the upper
strict triangular group T x («, A) is nilpotent of class sgn — 1 (and exactly of
class n — 1 if A ^ {0}).*

(3) Let G be a nilpotent group of class n. Every subgroup (resp. every
quotient group) of G is nilpotent of class &lt; n. For, if H is a subgroup of
G, then C n (H) c C n (G). If G' is a quotient group of G and n: G -* G' is
the canonical homomorphism, then C n (G') = 7t(C n (G)).

(4) A finite product of nilpotent groups is nilpotent.

Proposition 7. Let G be a group and n an integer. The following conditions are
equivalent:

(a) G is nilpotent of class ^n.

(b) There exists a series of subgroups ofG:

G = G 1 =3 G 2 =5 • • • ^ G n + 1 = {e}
such that (G, G fc ) &lt;= G fc + 1 for all k e (1 , n).

72



LOWER CENTRAL SERIES, NILPOTENT GROUPS § 6.3

(c) There exists a subgroup A ofG contained in the centre ofG such that G/A is nil-
potent of class &lt;n — 1.

(a) =&gt; (b) : it suffices to take G k = C fc (G).

(b) =&gt; (a) : by induction on k, C fc (G) c G fc .
(a) =&gt; (c) : it suffices to take A = C n (G).

(c) =&gt; (a): let tt:G-»G/A be the canonical homomorphism; then
7r(G n (G)) = C n (G/A) = {e} and hence C n (G) c A, whence G n + 1 (G) = {e}.

More briefly : a group is nilpotent of class &lt; n if it can be obtained from
the group {e} by n successive central extensions.

Corollary. A central extension of a nilpotent group {by a necessarily commutative
group) is nilpotent.

Proposition 8. Let G be a nilpotent group of class ^n and let H be a subgroup ofG.
There exists a sequence of subgroups

G = H 1 o H 2 =&gt; • • • =&gt; H n + 1 = H,

such that H k + 1 is normal in H fc and H fc /H fc + x is commutative for all k ^ n.

Choose a sequence (G k ) of subgroups of G satisfying the conditions of
Proposition 7 (b) for all k; G k is normal in G. Write:

H fc = H Qk

It is necessary to verify that H fc+1 is normalized by H fc = H.G fc ; as it is
normalized by H, it suffices to verify that it is by G fc . Now, if s e G k and h e H,

shs- 1 =shs- 1 h~ 1 .he{G,G k ).H

and (G, G k ) .H is contained in G* + 1 .H = H fc + 1 ; hence s.H k + 1 .s- 1 = H +fcl ,
which shows that H fc + 1 is normal in H fc .

Finally, the canonical homomorphism G fc /G fc + 1 -&gt;H fc /H fc+1 is obviously
surjective; as the first group is commutative, so is the second.

Corollary 1 . Let G be a nilpotent group and H a subgroup of G. If ' H is distinct
from G, the normalizer N G (H) of H in G is distinct from H.

Let k be the largest index such that H fc =£ H. The group H fc normalizes H
and is distinct from H.

Corollary 2. Let G be a nilpotent group and H a subgroup of G. If H is distinct
from G, there exists a normal subgroup No/G, containing H, distinct from G and such
that G/N is commutative.

Let k be the least index such that H fc ^ G. The group H fc satisfies the re-
quired conditions.

73



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Corollary 3. Let Gbea nilpotent group and H a subgroup o/G. IfG = H . (G, G),
then G = H.

Every subgroup N of G which contains H and such that G/N is commutative
contains H.(G, G). Corollary 3 thus follows from Corollary 2.

Corollary 3 can also be formulated thus : let X be a subset of G. For X to
generate G, it is necessary and sufficient that the image of X in G/D(G)
generate G/D(G).

Corollary 4. Let/: G' -&gt; G be a group homomorphism. Suppose that

(a) G is nilpotent.

(b) The homomorphism f x : G'/(G', G') -&gt; G/(G, G), derived from f by passing
to the quotients, is surjective.

Then f is surjective.

This follows from Corollary 3 applied to the subgroup H =/(G').

Proposition 9. Let G be a nilpotent group of class ^nandletlS be a normal subgroup
ofG. There exists a series of subgroups

N = N 1 = N 2 3 . . . 3 N n + 1 = {e}

such that (G, N fc ) c N k + 1 for k=l,...,n.

If (G fc ) satisfies condition (b) of Proposition 7, then take

N fc = G fc n N.

Corollary 1 . Let G be a nilpotent group, Z the centre ofG and N a normal subgroup
of G. If IS ^ {e}, then N n Z # {e}.

Let k be the largest index such that N fc ^ {e}. The group N fc is contained in
N. On the other hand, (G, N fc ) c N fc + 1 = {e}; hence N fc is contained in the
centre Z of G.

Corollary 2. Let f be a homomorphism from a nilpotent group G to a group G'. If the
restriction off to the centre ofGis infective, f is infective.

This is Corollary 1 applied to Ker(/).

4. DERIVED SERIES, SOLVABLE GROUPS

Definition 7. Let G be a group. The derived series ofG is the series (D n (G)) neN
defined inductively by :

D°(G) = G; D n + 1 (G) = D(D n (G)) &gt;n£N.

Then D°(G) = C*(G) = G, D^G) = C 2 (G) = D(G) = (G, G). For all

74



DERIVED SERIES, SOLVABLE GROUPS § 6.4

Tie's, D n (G) cz C 2n (G), as is seen by induction on n using formula (7) of
no. 3.

Let f: G -&gt; G' be a group homomorphism. It is seen, by induction on n,
that/(D n (G)) c D n (G') and that, if/ is surjective,/(D n (G)) = D n (G'). In
particular, for all n e N, D n (G) is a characteristic (and therefore normal) sub-
group of G. For all bgN, the group D n (G)/D n + 1 (G) is a commutative normal
(but not in general central) subgroup of G/D n + 1 (G).

Let (G , G 1} . . .) be a decreasing sequence of subgroups of G such that:
(1) G = G; (2) for all i, G 1 + 1 is normal in G t and G t jG i + 1 is commutative.
Then D'(G) &lt;= G 4 for all i, as is seen by induction on i.

Definition 8. A group G is called solvable if there exists an integer n such that
D n (G) = {e}. If G is a solvable group, the least integer n such that D n (G) = {e} is
called the solvability class of G.

A solvable group of solvability class n is called a solvable group of class n. A
group is sometimes said to be of finite solvability class if it is solvable.

Examples. (1) A group is solvable of class (resp. &lt; 1) if and only if it is
reduced to {«} (resp. is commutative).

(2) Every nilpotent group of class &lt;2 n — 1 is solvable of class &lt;n;
this follows from the relation D n (G) &lt;=■ C 2 "(G) proved above.

(3) Let G be a solvable group of class &lt; n. Every subgroup (resp. quo-
tient group) of G is solvable of class &lt; n (proof analogous to that of no. 3,
Example 3).

(4) If G is a solvable group of class p and F is a solvable group of class q,
every extension E of G by F is a solvable group of class ^p + q. For, let
7u : E -*- G be the projection; then 7r(D p (E)) c D p (G) = {e} and therefore
D P (E) c F; it follows that D" + «(E) = D«(D"(E)) c D«(F) = {«}.

(5) The symmetric group 6 n is solvable if and only if n &lt; 5 (cf. § 5,
Exercises 10 and 16).

(6) *If A is a commutative ring, the upper triangular group T(n, A) is
solvable but not in general nilpotent. *

Proposition 10. Let G be a group and n an integer. The following conditions are
equivalent:

(i) G is solvable of class ^n.

(ii) There exists a series of normal subgroups ofG

such that the groups G k jG k + 1 are commutative.
(iii) There exists a series of subgroups ofG

G = G° =&gt; G 1 =&gt;••=&gt; G* = *

such that, for all k, G fc + 1 is a normal subgroup ofG k and G fc /G fc + 1 is commutative.

75



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(iv) There exists a normal commutative subgroup Ao/G such that G/A is solvable
of class ^n — 1.

For (i) =&gt; (ii) it suffices to take G fc equal to D fc (G). (ii) =&gt; (iii) trivially,
(iii) =&gt; (i) for D te (G) is necessarily contained in G fc . The equivalence of (ii) and
(iv) is immediate by induction on n.

More briefly : a group is solvable of class &lt; n if it can be obtained by
successive extensions of n commutative groups.

Corollary. Let G be a finite group and

G = G°3G 1 =-oG n = {«}

a Jordan-Holder series of G For G to be solvable, it is necessary and sufficient that the
quotients G fc /G fc + 1 be cyclic of prime order.

If the quotients of a composition series of G are cyclic and hence commuta-
tive, G is solvable by Proposition 10. Conversely, if G is solvable, the group
G fc /G fc + 1 is, for all k, solvable and simple (§ 4, no. 7, Proposition 9). Now, every
solvable simple group H is cyclic of prime order. For D(H) is a normal sub-
group of H;D(H) = His impossible for in that case D fc (H) = H for all k; then
D(H) = {e} and H is commutative. The corollary then follows from § 4, no. 10,
Corollary to Proposition 20.

5. p-GROUPS

In this number and the following, the letter p denotes a prime number (§ 4, no 10,
Proposition 16).

Definition 9. A finite group whose order is a power ofp is called a /(-group.

Let G be a /(-group of order p r . Every divisor of p r is a power of p (§ 4,
no. 10, Corollary to Theorem 7). Therefore every subgroup and every quotient
group of G is a /(-group (§ 4, no. 4, Corollary to Proposition 4) ; the cardinal
of every homogeneous space of G is a power of/&gt; (§ 5, no. 5, Theorem 1).

An extension of a /(-group by a /(-group is a /(-group.

* Examples. (1) A commutative /(-group is isomorphic to a product of
cyclic groups Z//&gt; n Z (cf. Exercise 19 and also VII, § 4, no. 7, Proposition 7).

(2) Let A; be a finite field of characteristic p. The strict triangular group
Tx( n &gt; k) is a /(-group.

(3) The quaternionic group {± 1, ±i, ±j, ±k} is a 2-group (cf. Exercise
4)-*

Proposition 1 1 . Let E be a finite set and G a p-group operating on E. Let E G denote
the setofxeF, such that gx = xfor all geG (the fixed points). Then

Card(E G ) = Card(E) (mod.p).
76



/-GROUPS § 6.5

E — E G is a disjoint union of orbits not reduced to a point. The cardinal
of such an orbit is a power of p distinct from p° = 1 and hence a multiple
of/.

Corollary. Let G be ap-group. IfG is not reduced to e, its centre is not reduced to e.

Let G operate on itself by inner automorphisms. The set of fixed points is the
centre Z of G. By Proposition 11,

Card(Z) = Card(G) = (mod./),

whence Card(Z) ^ 1 and Z # {e}.

Theorem 1. Let G be ap-group andp r its order. There exists a sequence of subgroups of
G

G = G 1 ^G 2 3-o G r+1 = {e}

such that (G, G*) &lt;= G* + 1 , 1 ^ k &lt; r, and G*/G* + 1 , 1 &lt; k ^ r, is cyclic of
order p.

The theorem is true for G = {e}. We prove it by induction on Card(G). Let
Z be the centre of G, x # e an element of Z (Corollary to Proposition 11) and
p s , s # 0, the order of*. Then # pS_1 is an element of order p and therefore Z
contains a subgroup G r which is cyclic of order p. By the induction hypothesis,
the group G' = G/G r has a series of subgroups (G' k ) 1&lt;k&lt;r with the required
properties. Let tc: G-&gt; G' be the canonical homomorphism. The sequence of
subgroups of G defined by G k = u- 1 (G' k ), 1 &lt; k ^ r, G r+1 = {e} is a solu-
tion for G k IG k + 1 is isomorphic to G' fc /G ,fc + 1 for 1 ^ k ^ r(§4, no. 7,
Theorem 4).

Corollary. Every p-group is nilpotent.

This follows from no. 3, Proposition 7.

Proposition 12. Let G be ap-group and H a subgroup ofG distinct from G. Then:

(a) The normalizer N G (H) of H in G is distinct from G.

(b) There exists a normal subgroup No/G of index p in G, which contains H.

Assertion (a) follows from no. 3, Corollary 1 to Proposition 8. We prove (b) .
By no. 3, Corollary 2 to Proposition 8, there exists a normal subgroup N' of
G containing H, distinct from G and such that G/N' is commutative. Let N be
a maximal subgroup distinct from G containing N'. Then N is normal (no. 2,
Corollary 3 to Proposition 6) and G/N is a simple commutative /-group and
hence cyclic of order/ (§ 4, no. 10, Corollary to Proposition 20).

Corollary. Let G be a p-group. Every subgroup ofGof index p is normal.

77



ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES



6. SYLOW SUBGROUPS



Definition 10. Let G be a finite group. A Sy low p-sub group qfGis any subgroup P of
G satisfying the two following conditions:

(a) P is a p-group.

(b) (G:P) is not a multiple of p.

If the order of G is written in the form p r m, where m is not a multiple of p }
conditions (a) and (b) are equivalent to Card(P) = p r .

Examples. (1) In the group &amp; p let Z, be a cycle of order p. The subgroup
generated by £ is a Sylow /(-subgroup of €&gt; p for p does not divide (p — 1) !.
(2) *Let k be a finite field of characteristic p and let n be a positive in-
teger. The strict triangular group T x (re, k) is a Sylow /(-subgroup of the group
GL(n, *).„

Theorem 2. Every finite group contains a Sylow p-sub group.

The proof depends on the following lemma.
Lemma. Let n = p r m, where m is an integer which is not a multiple of p. Then



(;)



=z§ (mod.p).



Let S be a group of order p r (for example Z//» r Z) and T a set with m elements.
Write X = S x T and let E be the set of subsets of X with/&gt; r elements. Then

Card(X) = «, whence Gard(E) = I J (Set Theory, III, § 5, no. 8, Corollary 1

to Proposition 11). Let S operate on X by s. (x, y) = (sx, y) (s,xeS,yE T) and
consider the canonical extension of this operation to E. In the notation of no. 5,
Proposition 1 1 , the set E s is the set of orbits of X, that is the set of subsets YcX
of the form S x {t}, teT, whence Card(E s ) = m. By no. 5, Proposition 1 1,



(;)



Card(E) = Card(E s ) = m &amp; (mod./&gt;),



which proves the lemma.

We now prove the theorem. Let G be a finite group and n its order; we write
n = p r m, where m is not a multiple of p. Let E be the set of subsets of G with/&gt; r
elements. Then



Card(E) = (£);



whence, by virtue of the lemma, Card(E) ^ (mod. p). Consider the extension
to E of the operation of G on itself by left translation. There exists X e E whose
orbit has non-zero cardinal mod. p. If H x denotes the stabilizer of X, then

78



SYLOW SUBGROUPS § 6.6

(G:H X ) 5* (mod./&gt;), which means that/» r divides Card(H x ). But H x consists
of the seG such that sK = X; if x e X, then H x &lt;= X.*" 1 , whence
Card(H x ) ^ Card(X) = p\ Hence Card(H x ) = p\

Corollary. If the order o/Gis divisible by p, the group G contains an element of
order p.

By virtue of Theorem 2, this is reduced to the case where G is a /(-group
t&amp; {e}; if x g G is different from e, the cyclic group generated by x is then of
order p n with n ^ 1 and it therefore contains a subgroup of order p.

Remark. For every prime number q dividing Card(G), let P Q be a Sylow y-sub-
group of G. Then the subgroup H of G generated by the P Q is of order a multiple
of Card(P fl ) for each q and of order a divisor of Card (G), hence it is equal to G.

Theorem 3. Let G be a finite group.

(a) The Sylow p-subgroups of G are conjugate to one another. Their number is
congruent to 1 mod. p.

(b) Every subgroup ofG which is a p-group is contained in a Sylow p-sub group.

Let P be a Sylow /(-subgroup of G (Theorem 2) and let H be a /(-subgroup
of G. Let E = G/P and consider the operation of H on G/P. As Gard(E) ^
mod. p, Proposition 1 1 of no. 5, shows that there exists x e G/P such that
hx = x for all h e H. If g is a representative of x in G, this means that
H c gPg~ x , whence assertion (b).

If H is a Sylow /(-subgroup, then Card(H) = Card(P) = Card^P^- 1 ),
whence H = gPg' 1 , which proves the first assertion of (a).

We now prove the second assertion of (a). Let y be the set of Sylow /(-sub-
groups of G and let P operate on Sf by inner automorphisms. The element
P e y is a fixed point under this operation, we show that it is the only one. Let
Q,e y be a fixed point; Q,is a Sylow subgroup of G normalized by P and hence
P is contained in the normalizer N of Q. The groups P and Q,are Sylow /(-sub-
groups of N; hence there exists n e N such that P = nQ,n _1 = Q,. By no. 5,
Proposition 11, Card(^) = Card(y p ) = 1 (mod.p).

Corollary 1. Let P be a Sylow p-sub group ofG, let N be its normalizer in G and let
M be a subgroup ofG containing N. The normalizer of M in G is equal to M.

Let s e G be such that sMs' 1 = M. The subgroup sFs' 1 of M is a Sylow
/(-subgroup of M. There thus exists teM such that sPs -1 = tPr 1 ; then
r^GN, whence s e tN &lt;= M.

Corollary 2. Let f: G x -&gt; G 2 be a homomorphism of finite groups. For every Sylow
p-subgroup Pj ofG x there exists a Sylow p-sub group P 2 ofG 2 such that /(J*,) &lt;= P 2 .

This follows from Theorem 3 (b) applied to the subgroup/(P 1 ) of G 2 .

79



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Corollary 3. (a) Let H be a subgroup of G. For every Sylow p-subgroup P of H
there exists a Sylow p-subgroup QofG such that P = Q,nH.

(b) Conversely, ifQisa Sylow p-subgroup of G and H is normal in G, the group
QnHws Sylow p-subgroup ofH.

(a) The /(-group P is contained in a Sylow /(-subgroup Q, of G and QnH
is a /^-subgroup of H containing P and is hence equal to P.

(b) Let P' be a Sylow /(-subgroup of H. There exists an element ^eG such
that g~P'g~ x &lt;= Q,. As H is normal, P = gP'g' 1 is contained in H and hence in
Qn H. As Q,n H is a /(-subgroup of H and P is a Sylow /(-subgroup of H,
P = Q,nH.

Corollary 4. Let N be a normal subgroup ofG. The image in G/N of a Sylow p-sub-
group of G is a Sylow p-subgroup of G/N and every Sylow p-subgroup of G/N is ob-
tained in this way.

Let G' = G/N and P' be the image in G' of a Sylow /(-subgroup P of G. The
group G operates transitively on G'/P' and hence G'/P' is equipotent to G/S,
where S is a subgroup of G containing P. Therefore (G':P') divides (G:P), is
thus not a multiple of/&gt; and the /(-group P' is a Sylow /(-subgroup of G'. Let Q,'
be another Sylow j&amp;-subgroup of G'; then Q,' = g'P'g' _1 for some g' eG'; if
g e G is a representative of g', the group Q,' is the image of Q, = g^g' 1 .

7. FINITE NILPOTENT GROUPS

Theorem 4. Let G be a finite group. The following conditions are equivalent:

(a) G is nilpotent.

(b) G is a product of p-groups.

(c) For every prime number p there exists a normal Sylow p-subgroup ofG.
(b) =&gt; (a) (no. 5, Corollary to Theorem 1).

Suppose (a) holds and let P be a Sylow /(-subgroup ofG. If N is the norma-
lizer of P in G, Corollary 1 to Theorem 3 shows that N is its own normalizer.
By § 6, no. 3, Corollary to Proposition 8, this shows that N = G. Hence
(a) =&gt; (c).

Suppose (c) holds and let I be the set of prime numbers dividing Card(G).
For all/( g I, let P p be a normal Sylow jb-subgroup ofG. For allp # ?, P p n P„
is reduced to e for it is both a p-group and a q-group, hence P p and P Q centralize
one another (§4, no. 9, Proposition 15). Let &lt;J&gt; be the canonical homo-

morphism (§4, no. 9, Proposition 12) of I 1 P p into G. The homomor-

phism &lt;f&gt; is surjective by the Remark of no. 6. As Card(l g I P p j = Card(G), it
follows that § is bijective.

80



FREE MAGMAS §7.1

Remarks. (1) Let G be a finite group and p a prime number. By no. 6,
Theorem 3 (a) and no. 6, Theorem 2, the following conditions are equiva-
lent :

(i) there exists a normal Sylow /(-subgroup of G;

(ii) every Sylow /(-subgroup of G is normal;

(iii) there exists only one Sylow /(-subgroup of G.

(2) Let G be a nilpotent finite group. Let I be the set of prime divisors of
Gard(G). By Theorem 4 and Remark 1, G = 1 1 G P , where G p is the unique

Sylow j&amp;-group of G.

(3) Applied to commutative groups, Theorem 4 gives the decomposition,
of commutative finite groups as a product of primary components, which
will be studied from another point of view in Chapter VII.

Example. The group 3 is of order 6. It contains a normal Sylow 3-subgroup
of order 3 : the group 2l 3 . It contains three Sylow 2-subgroups of order 2 : the
groups {e, t}, where t is a transposition. The group &lt;S 3 is thus not nilpotent.



§ 7. FREE MONOIDS, FREE GROUPS

In this paragraph X will denote a set. Unless otherwise mentioned, the identity element of a
monoid will be denoted by e.

1. FREE MAGMAS

A sequence of sets M n (X) is defined by induction on the integer n ^ 1 as follows :
writing M X (X) = X, for n ^ 2, M n (X) is the set the sum of the sets
M P (X) x M n _ p (X) for 1 ^.p ^ n - 1. The set the sum of the family
(M n (X)) n&gt;1 is denoted by M(X) ; each of the sets M n (X) is identified with its
canonical image in M(X). For every element w of M(X) there exists a unique
integer n such that w e M rt (X) ; it is called the length ofw and denoted by / (w).
The set X consists of the elements in M(X) of length 1.

Let w and w' be in M(X); write p = l(w) and q = /(«/). The image of
(w, w') under the canonical injection of M P (X) x M g (X) into the sum set
M p+g (X) is called the composition ofw and w' and is denoted by ww' or w.w'.
Then I {w.w') = l(w) + l(w') and every element of M(X) of length ^2 can
be written uniquely in the form w'w" with w', w" in M(X).

The set M(X) with the law of composition (w, w') \-+ w . w' is called the free
magma constructed on X (§ 1, no. 1, Definition 1).

Proposition 1 . Let Mbea magma. Every mapping/ of 'X into M may be extended in a
unique way to a morphism o/"M(X) into M.

By induction on n ^, mappings f n : M„(X) -&gt; M are defined as follows: let

81



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

/i =/; for n &gt; 2, the mapping/, is defined by/ B (a;.a&gt;') = f p (w) ./»_,(«/) for
/&gt; = 1, 2, . . ., w — 1 and (a;, a;') in M P (X) x M n _ p (X). Letg be the mapping
of M(X) into M which induces/,, on M n (X) for every integer n &gt; 1. Clearly
g is the unique morphism of M(X) into M which extends/.

Let u be a mapping of X into a set Y. By Proposition 1, there exists one and
only one homomorphism of M(X) into M(Y) which coincides with u on X. It
will be denoted by M(w) . If v is a mapping of Y into a set Z, the homomorphism
M.(v) o M(w) of M(X) into M(Z) coincides with v o u on X, whence

M(v) o M(u) = M(v o «).

Proposition 2. L^ «: X -&gt; Y be a mapping. Ifu is injective (resp. surjective, bijec-
tive), so is M(w).

Suppose u is injective. When X is empty, M(X) is empty, hence M(u) is in-
jective. If X is non-empty, there exists a mapping v of Y into X such that v °u
is the identity mapping of X (Set Theory, II, § 3, no. 8, Proposition 8) ; the
mapping M(z/) o M(u) = M(v ° u) is the identity mapping of M(X) and hence
M(w) is injective.

When u is surjective, there exists a mapping w of Y into X such that u°w
is the identity mapping of Y (Set Theory, II, § 3, no. 8, Proposition 8). Then
M(u) o M(w) = M(k o w) is the identity mapping of M(Y) and hence M(«) is
surjective.

Finally, ifu is bijective, it is injective and surjective and hence M(u) has the
same properties.

Let S be a subset of X. By Proposition 2 the injection of S into X can be ex-
tended to an isomorphism of M(S) onto a submagma M'(S) of M(X). The
magmas M(S) and M'(S) are identified by means of this isomorphism. Then
M(S) is the submagma of M(X) generated by S.

Let X be a set and (u K , z&gt; a ) ae i be a family of ordered pairs of elements of
M(X). Let R be the equivalence relation on M(X) compatible with the law of
M(X) and generated by the (u a , v a ) (§ 1, no. 6). The magma M(X)/R is
called the magma defined by X and the relators (w a , z&gt; a )aei- Let h be the canonical
morphism of M(X) onto M(X)/R. Then M(X)/R is generated by A(X).

Let N be a magma and (n x ) xeX a family of elements of N. Let k be the
morphism from M(X) to N such that k(x) = n x for all x e X (Proposition 1).
If k(u^ = k(Va) for all a e I, there exists one and only one morphism
/: M(X)/R -&gt; N such that/(A(*)) = n x for all x e X (§ 1, no. 6, Proposition 9).

2. FREE MONOIDS

Any finite sequence w = (x t ) 1&lt;i&lt;n of elements of X indexed by an interval
(I, n) of N (possibly empty) is called a word constructed on X. The integer n is
called the length of the word w and denoted by / (w). There is a unique word of

82



(I) »-{t.



FREE MONOIDS § 7.2

length 0, namely the empty sequence e. X will be identified with the set of
words of length 1 .

Let w = (*i)i &lt;i&lt;m and w' = (#j)i£j &lt;B be two words. The composition of
w and w' is the word u = (y/c)i&lt;fc&lt;m+n defined by

for 1 ^ k ^ m

for m + 1 ^ k ^ m + n.

In other words, the sequence w" is obtained by first writing the elements of the
sequence w and then those of w'. The composition of w and w' is generally de-
noted by ww' or w. w'; it is sometimes said that it is obtained by juxtaposition of
w and a/. Then by construction l(w.w') — l(w) + l(w').

The relation we = ew = w is immediately established for every word w. Let
w = (*i)i«i&lt;m&gt; w ' = ( x 'j)i&lt;j&lt;n an d w" = (*fc)i &lt;fc&lt;p be three words; clearly
the words w(w'w") and (ww')w" are both equal to the word (yj)i&lt;i&lt; m + n +p
defined by

{#j if 1 &lt; / ^ m

x l _ m if m + I ^ I ^ m + n
x"i- m - n ifm + n+1 ^ / &lt; m + n + p.

The above shows that the set of words constructed on X with the law of
composition (w, w') \~&gt;w. w' is a monoid with identity element e. It is denoted
by Mo(X) and called the^r^ monoid constructed on X. It follows immediately
from the definition of product of words that every word w = (# 4 ) 1&lt;i&lt;n is equal

n

to the product 11 #,. A word may therefore be written in the form x x . . . xn.

Proposition 3. Let ~M.be a monoid. Every mapping/ of "K into M extends uniquely to
a homomorphism q/"Mo(X) into M.

Letg be a homomorphism of Mo(X) into M extending/. If w = (x i ) 1&lt;J&lt;n

n

is a word, then w = 11 #, in the monoid Mo(X), whence

n n

g(w) = n g (x i ) = ri/&gt; 4 )

in the monoid M (§ 1, no. 2, formula (2)). This proves the uniqueness of g.

n

Let h{w) = 1 = !/(#() for every word w = (Xi) 1&lt;i&lt;n . The associativity

theorem (§ 1, no. 3, Theorem 1) and the definition of product in Mo(X)
imply h(ww') = h(w)h(w'). By convention the empty product h{e) is the
identity element of M and h(x) =f(x) for x e X. Hence h is a homomorphism
of Mo(x) into M extending f.

Let u: X -&gt; Y be a mapping. By Proposition 3, there exists one and only one

83



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

homomorphism of Mo(X) into Mo(Y) which coincides with u on X; it is
denoted by Mo («) . It maps a word (x t ) x ^ 4 ^ n to the word (u(x i )) 1&lt;i&lt;n .Asin the
case of magmas (no. 1), the equation Mo(» oa)= Mo(i&gt;) o Mo(a) is established
for every mapping v: Y -&gt; Z and it can be shown that Mo(a) is injective (resp.
surjective, bijective) if u is. For every subset S of X, Mo(S) is identified with the
submonoid of Mo(X) generated by S.

Let X be a set and (w a , »„) aeI be a family of ordered pairs of elements of
Mo(X). Let R be the equivalence relation on Mo(X) compatible with the law
on Mo(X) and generated by the (u a , v a ) (§ 1, no. 6). The monoid Mo(X)/R
is called the monoid defined by X and the relators (w a , v a ) aeI . Let h be the canonical
morphism of Mo(X) onto Mo(X)/R. Then Mo(X) is generated by h(K).

Let N be a monoid and (n x ) xeX a family of elements of N. Let k be the
morphism of Mo(X) into N such that k(x) = n x for all x e X (Proposition 3).
If k(u a ) = k(v a ) for all a e I, there exists one and only one magma morphism
/: Mo(X)/R -» N such that f(h(x)) = n x for all x e X (§ 1, no. 6, Proposition
9) ; as k is unital,/is a monoid morphism.

3. AMALGAMATED SUM OF MONOIDS

Let (Af t ) ieI denote a family of monoids and e { the identity element ofM t . We are given
a monoid A and a family of homomorphisms h t : A -» M { (for tel).

The set S the sum of the family (M ( ) (eI has elements the ordered pairs (i, x)
with tel and x e M t . For every triple oc = (i, x, x') with i e I, x, x' in M J} write
u a = (t, xx') and v a = (i, x) . (i, x') ; for every triple X = (i,j, a) in I x I x A,
write p h = (i, h^a)) and q K = (j, h^a)) ; for all i e I, write e { = (i, «,). The
monoid M defined by S and the relators (« a , v a ), (p K , q^) and (e i5 e) is called the
sum of the family (Mi) ieI amalgamated by A. Let &lt;}&gt; denote the canonical homo-
morphism of Mo(S) onto M and write if x {x) = §(i, x) for (i, x) g S. It is said

that &lt;j&gt; t is the canonical mapping of M t into M. For all aeA, the element cj&gt;(z, h^a))
is independent of i and denoted by h(a).'\

The universal property of monoids defined by generators and relators (no. 2)
implies the following result:

Proposition 4. (a) For all i e I, the mapping &lt;f&gt;i is a homomorphism of M 4 into M

and (j&gt;j o h { = hfor all i e I. Further, M is generated by U ^(Mj).

(b) Let M' be a monoid and f'\ M { -&gt; M' {for iel) homomorphisms such
that f o ^ is independent of iel. There exists one and only one homomorphism
f: M -&gt; M' such thatf =f° fytfor all iel.

In what follows we shall make the following hypothesis:

(A) For all iel, there exists a subset P t of M t containing e t such that the mapping
(a,p) i-&gt; hi{a) .pofA x P 4 into M t is bijective.

■f When I is empty, M = {e} and h(a) = e for all aeA.
84



AMALGAMATED SUM OF MONOIDS § 7.3

It implies that the homomorphisms h t are injective. Let x e M; every finite
sequence cr = fa Hi • • -, i n '&gt;Pi&gt; • • -&gt;Pn) with aeA, i a el and /i a eP j(&lt; for
1 ^ a ^ n, satisfying

n

(3) x = h(a).TJj ia (p a )

is called a decomposition qfx. The integer n ^ is called the length of the decom-
position cr and is denoted by I (a) ; the sequence (e) is a decomposition of length

of the identity element of M. The decomposition a is called reduced if i a ^ i x+1
for 1 ^ a &lt; n and /&gt; a # £ ia for 1 ^ a ^ «.

Proposition 5. £//u&amp;r hypothesis (A) ez/^ry element xqfWL admits a unique reduced
decomposition a. Every decomposition a' ^ a of x satisfies I (a) &gt; 1(g).

(A) Uniqueness of a reduced decomposition :

LetS denote the set of sequences cr = (a;i 1 ,...,i n ;p 1 ,.. .,p n ) with n ^ 0,
aeA, ? a el and j&amp; a eP ia — {e ic } for 1 ^ a &lt; n, such that z a # z a + 1 for

1 ^ a &lt; rc. Let &lt;J&gt; denote the mapping of 21 into M defined by

n

(4) 0(a; «!, . . ., *„;&amp;, ...,p n ) = h(a).YJ fafa).

A reduced decomposition of x e M is an element cr of 2 such that &lt;&amp;(a) = x.

For all i e I, let 2 { be the subset of 2 consisting of the sequences
(e; i 1} . . ., i n ;pi, . . .,/&gt;„) with i ^ z\ when n &gt; 0. Let

cr = («;«i,. . . , i n ; pi, . . . , p n )

be in S, and £ in M ( ; let £ = At(fl) ./&gt; with aeA and /&gt; e P i3 and

(5) Y(E ct) = /( a » , ' 1 » * ••&gt; i n',Pi,---,Pn) i£p = e t

iK J \fa i, h, . . .,i n ;p,p u . . ., p n ) Up # e t .

It is immediate that T, is a bijection of M { x 2 ( onto 2.

Let iel and ^eMjjasfj is bijective, a mapping^ x of 2 into itself is de-
fined by

(6) A*(m «)) = Y f (*5, a) (5 g M i? &lt;, gS,).
Further, for aeA,f a denotes the mapping of 2 into itself defined by

( 7 ) faW'» h, ■ ■ -, inlPl, • • &gt;,Pn) = fa ', H, • • •, i n '» Pl&gt; • • -,Pn)-

Clearly f u 6( is the identity mapping of 2 and/ f&gt; .,.,, =f i)X °f t , *&gt; for x, x' in M,
andj^ Mb) = f a for a g A and * e I.

Then Proposition 4 may be applied to the case where M' is the monoid of
mappings of 2 into itself with law of composition (/,/') *-&gt;f°f' and where

85



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

ft is the homomorphism x *-+f itX of M { into M'; then there exists a homo-
morphism/of M into M' such tha.tf Ux = /(&lt;{&gt;{(*)) for iel and x e M,. Let

c = (a; i lt . . ., i n ;pn &gt;..,p n )
be in 2. Formulae (5) to (7) imply by induction on n the relation

&lt;* = {fa°fiuPi Q ---°fi«.Pn)( e )

that is cr =/( $(&lt;*))(*)• This proves that O is injective.

(B) Existence of a decomposition:

Let D be the set of elements of M admitting a decomposition. Then eeT) and
M is generated by U^^Mf) and hence by A(A) U U ^(P,). Then
D.^i(P { ) cz D for all i e I; to prove that D = M, it thus suffices to prove the
relation D.A(A) &lt;= D. This follows from the following more precise lemma:

Lemma 1. Let i 1} . . ., i n be in I and p a in P ia for 1 ^ a ^ n. For all aeA there
exists a' e A and a sequence (/&gt;«)i &lt;&lt;x&lt;n w ^ Pa. E Pi a suc ^ ^at

KM • • -K(Pn)Ka) = Ka')^^) . . .§ in {p' n ).

h(a) = §i n {h in (a)) and there exists a n eA and p' n e P in with

Pn-KSfi) = h iM-Pn-

It follows that §i n {p n )h(a) = h(a n )$ in (p' n ), whence

K(Pi) • • -K-i(Pn-i)K(Pn)Ka) = KM • • •&lt;k-i(A.-iWa B )&lt;k(X) ;

the lemma follows from this by induction on n.

(G) End of the proof:

Let x £ M and let w be the minimum of the lengths of decompositions of x.
We shall prove that every decomposition a ofx of length n is reduced. This will
establish the existence of a reduced decomposition ofx; the uniqueness of the
reduced decomposition then implies I (a') &gt; 1(a) for every decomposition
a' # a of x.

The case n = being trivial, suppose n &gt; 0. Let

a = (a; f'u . . -,i n \Pu ■ ■ -,Pn)

be a decomposition of* of length n. If there existed an integer a with 1 &lt; a &lt; n
and /&gt; a = e ia , the sequence

(flj z'u . . ., * a _i, i'a + 15 • • •&gt; *n&gt;Pl&gt; - • •}P&lt;t-l&gt;P&lt;x + l&gt; • • -&gt;Pn)

86



AMALGAMATED SUM OF MONOIDS § 7.3

would be a decomposition of # of length n — 1, which is excluded. Suppose
that there exists an integer a with 1 &lt; a &lt; n and i a = i a+1 and let

AxAx+i = kS a ')'P*
with a' £ A and p' a e P, a ; by Lemma 1 there exists elements a" e A,

#eP tl ,...,^_ 1 eP iB _ 1
such that

KCfc) • • •&lt;k- 1 (A.-i)A(&lt;0 = *(0&lt;k(#) • • -K-x^-x)
and the sequence

\aa J »i, . . ., * a -l» *ocj *a + 2&gt; • • •&gt; *n\ Pit • • • &gt; Pct-1&gt; P«) Pa + 2&gt; • • •j/'n)

is a decomposition of a; of length « — 1, which is a contradiction.
We have thus proved that a is reduced.

Corollary. Under hypothesis (A) the homomorphisms ({&gt;, and h are injective. For
i ±j in I, MM,) n &lt;j&gt; y (M y ) = A(A).

First A is injective: if A (a) = A (a'), then (a) and (a') are two reduced de-
compositions of the same element of M, whence a = a'. Let i'gI; then
h(A) = ^(^(A)) &lt;= ^(Mj); the uniqueness of reduced decompositions implies

A(A)n&lt;j&gt; i (M l -A i (A)) = 0,

whence c|&gt; 4 (M, - A,(A)) = MM,) - A (A).

The injectivity of the homomorphisms tj&gt; f and the relation

MM,) n mm,) &lt;= *(A)

for i ^ j are then consequences of the following fact : for i,j in I, x in M, — A, (A)
and y in M y — A, (A), the relation M#) = $j(j/) implies i = j and x = y. Let
a: = A, (a) ./&gt; and y = hj{b).q with a, £ in A, p in P, — {e t } and y in P, — {*,}.
Then M*) = n ( a )$i(P) an d ^(y) = K^)^M) an ^ hence (a; i;/&gt;) and (£;,/; #)
are two reduced decompositions of the same element of M. It follows that
i = j } a = b and/) = q, whence x = h t (a)p — hj{b)q = y.

When hypothesis (A) is fulfilled, we shall identify each monoid M, with a
submonoid of M by means of M similarly, we shall identify A with a sub-
monoid of M by h. Then M is generated by U M, and M, n M, = A for i ^ j.

n
Every element of M can be written uniquely in the form a.L l/&gt; a with

a e A, p x e P a — {e}, . . . , p n e P (n — {e} and i a ^ i a+ x for 1 ^ a &lt; n. Finally, if
M' is a monoid and (/: M,-&gt;M') (for iel) a family of homomorphisms
whose restrictions to A are the same homomorphism of A into M', there exists
one and only one homomorphism/: M -» M' inducing/ on M, for all i e I.

87



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Hypothesis (A) is satisfied in two important cases:

(a) A = {e}. In this case, there is a family (M { ) ieI of monoids and M is
called the monoidal sum of this family. Each M t is identified with a submonoid

of M and M is generated by U M, ; further, M t n M y = {e} for i # j. Every

element of M may be written uniquely in the form x 1 . . . x n with

*i e M h -{e},...,x n e M in - {e}

and i a =£ i a + 1 for 1 ^ a &lt; n. Finally, for every family of homomorphisms
(f t : Mj-&gt;M'), there exists a unique homomorphism /: M -&gt; M' whose
restriction to M { isyi for all tel.

(b) There is a family of groups (Gj) jeI containing as subgroup the same
group A and h t is the injection of A into G { . The sum of the family (G 4 ) JeI

amalgamated by A is then a group G: the monoid G is generated by U (^(Gj)
and every element of U (j&gt;i(G 4 ) admits an inverse in G (cf. § 2, no. 3, Corollary

1 to Proposition 4); it is denoted by -¥r A G t or G x * A G 2 when I = {1, 2}.
When A consists of the identity element, it is also said that G is the free product
of the family (G t ) ieI of groups and it is denoted by -X- G ( (or G x * G 2 if
I = {l,2}).f

4. APPLICATION TO FREE MONOIDS

Lemma 2. Let M be the monoidal sum of the family (M x ) xeK defined by M x = Nfor
all x e X and let § x denote the canonical homomorphism of WL X into M. The mapping
x &gt;-*" §x(l) ?/*X into M extends to an isomorphism h o/Mo(X) onto M.

Let h be the homomorphism of Mo(X) into M characterized by
h(x) = &lt;f&gt;*(l). For every integer n ^ 0, &lt;j&gt;*(«) = § x (l) n = h(x) n and as M is
generated by U &lt;j&gt;*(N), it is also generated by h(K). Hence h is surjective.

Moreover, for all x in X, the mapping n*-&gt; x n is a homomorphism of
N = M x into Mo(X) ; there thus exists (no. 3, Proposition 4) a homomorphism
h' of M into Mo(X) such that h'{$ x {n)) = x n for x e X and n g N; in particular,
h'(h{x)) = x for x e X and hence h' o h is the identity homomorphism of Mo (X) .
Therefore h is injective. It has thus been proved that h is bijective.

Proposition 6. Let w be an element of Mo (X).

(a) There exist an integer n ^ 0, elements x^qfX. and integers m(a) &gt; {for



f Note that G x * G 2 is not the "product" of Gx and G 2 in the sense of Set Theory,
IV, § 2, no. 4 (nor in the sense of the "theory of categories" ; in the context of this
theory, G 1 * G 2 is the "sum" of G x and G 2 ).

88



FREE GROUPS § 7.5

n

1 ^ a ^ n) such that # a ?£ x a+1 /or 1 ^ a &lt; n and w = 11 #™ (a) . The sequence
(* a , m(a)) 1&lt;0L&lt;n is determined uniquely by these conditions.

(b) Let p be a positive integer, x' a in X and m'((J) in N for 1 ^ (3 &lt;; jb mcA Jfotf
p

o&gt; = 1 = 1 *' m ' (B) . Xfon /&gt; ^ n. If p = n, then x' &amp; = *„ and m'((3) = m(p) /or

1 &lt; P &lt; A

-l
In the notation of Lemma 2, A ($*(»)) = x n for * e X and neN. Proposition
6 then follows from no. 3, Proposition 5.

5. FREE GROUPS

Let G x = Z for all x e X. The free product of the family (G x ) xeX is called the
free group constructed on X and is denoted by F(X). Let § x denote the canonical
homomorphism of G x = Z into F(X). By no. 3, Corollary to Proposition 5, the
mapping x h-&gt; § x (l) of X into F(X) is injective; we shall identify X with its
image in F(X) under this mapping. Then X generates F(X) and e$X.
Applying no. 3, Proposition 5, we obtain the following result :

Proposition 7. Let g be an element of the free group F(X). There exist an integer
n ^ and a sequence (x a , w(a)) 1&lt;a&lt;n determined uniquely by the relations # a e X,

n

**Tt *a + i for I &lt; a &lt; n, m(a) e Z, m(a) ^ Ofor 1 ^ a ^ n, andg = J~I *f a) .
The free group F(X) enjoys the following universal property:

Proposition 8. Let Gbe a group and fa mapping ofX into G. There exists one and
only one homomorphismfofF(K) into G which extends f

The uniqueness of/follows from the fact that the group F(X) is generated by
X. For all x in X, let/* be the homomorphism n&gt;-&gt;f(x) n of Z into G. By no. 3,
Proposition 4, there exists a homomorphism / of F(X) into G such that
f(x n ) =f x (n) for x eX and neZ; in particular, /(*) =/ x (l) =/(*) for all
*eX and hence /extends/.

Let u: X -&gt; Y be a mapping. By Proposition 8 there exists one and only one
homomorphism of F(X) into F(Y) which coincides with u on X; it is denoted
by F(«). As in the case of magmas (no. 1) the formula

F(v o u) = F(») o F(«)

is established for every mapping v : Y -&gt; Z and it is shown that F(a) is injective
(resp. surjective, bijective) if u is. For every subset S of X, F(S) will be identified
with the subgroup of F(X) generated by S.

Let I be a set. In certain cases it is of interest not to identify i in I with its

89



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

canonical image ({^(1) in the free group F(I) ; the latter will be denoted by T {
(or T' i} Xj, ... as the case may be) and called the indeterminate of index i. The
free group F(I) is then denoted by F((T t ) feI ) or F(Tu ...,T n ) if
I = {l,2,...,n}.

Let G be a group and t = (£ 4 ) le i a family of elements of G. By Proposition 8
there exists a homomorphism f t of F((T 4 ) ieI ) into G characterized by
jft(Ti) = t x for all iel. The image of an element w of F((T i ) i6l ) under f t will
be denoted by w(t) or w(t 1} . . ., t n ) if I = {1, 2, . . ., n}; w(t) is said to result
from the substitution Tj i-&gt; t t in w. In particular, if we take G = F((T 1 ) i6l ) and
(t t ) = (Tj) = T,f T is the identity homomorphism of G, whence w(T) = w;
for I = {1, 2, . . ., n}, then w(T lt . . ., T B ) = w.

Let G and G' be two groups, u a homomorphism of G into G' and
t = (t u . . ., t n ) a finite sequence of elements in G. Let t' = (ufa), . . ., u(t n )) ;
the homomorphism u °f t of F(T l5 ...,T n ) into G' maps T, to u(t t ) for
1 ^ i ^ n and hence is equal toj^; for w in F(T l5 . . ., T„), then

(8) u(w(t 1} . . ., O) = w ( u (h), • • -, «(0)-

Let w be given in F(T l5 . . ., T n ) and elements v u . . .,v n in the free group
F(Ti, . . . , T^,). The substitution T, h-&gt; v % defines an element w' = w(v 1} . . . , v n )
of F(Ti, . . . , T^,). Let G be a group, t Xi . . . , t m elements of G and u the homo-
morphism of F(Ti, . . . , T' m ) into G characterized by m(T,) = tj for 1 ^j^m.
Then u{v t ) = v t (t x , . . ., t m ) and u(w') = w(t x , . . ., t m ); formula (8) thus
implies

(9) «/(*!, . . ., t m ) = «;(»!(*!, . . ., O. • • •» y n(^l 5 • • •» O)-

This justifies the "functional notation" w(t 1} . . ., t n ). The reader is left to ex-
tend formulae (8) and (9) to the case of arbitrary indexing sets.

6. PRESENTATIONS OF A GROUP

Let G be a group and t = (/ t ) (6l a family of elements of G. Let/i be the unique
homomorphism of the free group F(I) into G which maps i to t t . The image of
f t is the subgroup generated by the elements t t of G. The elements of the kernel
of/i are called the relators of the family 1. 1 is called generating (resp. free, basic)
iff t is surjective (resp. injective, bijective).

Let G be a group. A presentation of G is an ordered pair (t, r) consisting of a
generating family t = (^) le i and a family r = (rj) je j of relators such that the
kernel N t of/i is generated by the elements grjg' 1 for ge¥(T) and j ej. It
amounts to the same to say that N t is the normal subgroup of F(I) generated
by the r y forj e J (in other words, the smallest normal subgroup of F(I) con-
taining the elements r y Q'eJ), cf. §4, no. 4). By an abuse of language the
generators t t and the relations r y (t) = e are said to constitute a. presentation of the
group G.

90



PRESENTATIONS OF A GROUP § 7.6

Let I be a set and r = (r^)y eJ a family of elements of the free group F(I).
Let N(r) be the normal subgroup of F(I) generated by the r, forjej. Let
F(I, r) = F(I)/N(r) and T t denote the class of i modulo N(r). The ordered pair
(t, r) with t = (Tj) ieI is a presentation of the group F(I, r) ; if G is a group and
(t, r) is a presentation of G with t = (f,) j6l , there exists a unique isomorphism
u of F(I, r) onto G such that u(x t ) = t t for all i e I. The group F(I, r) is said
to be defined by the generators x t and the relators r h or by an abuse of language
that it is defined by the generators T t and the relations rj(x) = e. When I = f 1, «) and
J = (1, m), it is said that F(I, r) is defined by the presentation

&lt;x 1} . . ., t„; r 1} . . ., r m &gt;.

If rj = uJ r Vj with Uj and v } in F(I), this presentation is equally denoted by the
symbol

&lt;fi, . . ., T n ; U t = v u .. ., u m = v n y.

Examples. (1) The group defined by the presentation &lt;t; t* = e) is cycHc of
order q.

(2) The group defined by the presentation (x,y; xy = yx} is isomorphic to
Z x Z.

Proposition 9. Let G be a group, t = (t t ) i6l a generating family of 'G and 'r = (r y )y 6j
a family of relators oft. The following conditions are equivalent:

(a) The ordered pair (t, r) is a presentation ofG.

(b) Let G' be a group andt' = (^) le i a family of elements ofG'. Ifr^t') = efor
allj E J, there exists a homomorphism uofG into G' such that u(t t ) = t{ for all i e I.

(c) Let G be a group andt = (? t ) Je i a generating family of G such that r^i) = efor
allj ej. Every homomorphism ofG into G which maps t x to t t for all i el is an iso-
morphism.

Let/ denote the homomorphism of F(I) into G which maps i to t t for all
tel and N the kernel off.

(a) =&gt; (b) : Suppose that (t, r) is a presentation ofG and let t' = (^) l6 i be a
family of elements of a group G' with r,(t') = e for alljej. Let/' be the
homomorphism of F(I) into G' characterized by /'(f) = t[ for all iel. By
hypothesis /'(r y ) = e for allj 6 J and, as N is generated by the elements
gr^g- 1 forj 6 J and g e F(I),/'(N) = {e}. As the homomorphism/: F(I) -&gt; G
is surjective with kernel N, there exists a homomorphism u: G -&gt; G' such that
/' = u of. Then ufa) = «(/(«)) =/'(«') = &lt;/•

(b) =&gt; (c): Suppose condition (b) holds. Let t = (^) (eI be a generating
family of a group G such that r y (t) = e for allj £ J and let v be a homomorphism
ofG into G such that v(l t ) = t t for all i e I. As the family (t t ) ieI generates G,
the homomorphism v is surjective. By property (b) there exists a homomorphism
u: G -&gt; G such that u(t t ) = \ for all i e I. Then «(»&amp;)) = ?, for all i e I and

91



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

hence u o v is the identity on G, which proves that v is injective. Hence v is an
isomorphism and condition (c) holds.

(c) =&gt; (a) : Suppose condition (c) holds. Let t[ be the canonical image of i in
F(I, r) and t' = (OisiJ then *&gt;(* ) = * for all J e J- A s r,(t) = « for all j ej,
there exists one and only one homomorphism v of F(I, r) into G such that
v(J t ) = t t for all i e I. By (c), v is an isomorphism of F(I, r) onto G which trans-
forms the presentation (t', r) of F(I, r) into a presentation (t, r) of G.

7. FREE COMMUTATIVE GROUPS AND MONOIDS

The set Z x of all mappings of X into Z is a commutative group under the law
defined by (a + p)(*) = a(*) + P(*)(a, peZ x , *eX); the elements of Z x
are sometimes called multiindices. The identity element, denoted by 0, is the
constant mapping with value 0. For a e Z x , the set S a of x e X such that
a(#) ^ is called the support of a; then S = and S a+B &lt;= S a U S for a, (3
in Z x . Therefore the set Z (X) of mappings a: X -&gt; Z of finite support is a sub-
group of Z X called the free commutative group constructed on X.
For all * e X, let 8* denote the element of Z (X) defined by

Also, for a e Z (X) , the integer |a|, the length of a is defined by the formula

(11) |a|=2 x a(*).

The following relations are immediately established:

(12) a=2 x a(*).8*

(13) |*,| = 1, |0| =

(14) |« + PI = M + IPI

for a, (S in Z (X) and x in X.

The order relation a ^ p is defined in Z (X) by a(*) &lt; p(*) for all x eX. The
relations a ^ p and a' ^ p' imply a + a' &lt; P + p', |a| ^ |p| and -a ^ -p;
further, the relation a ^ p is equivalent to p — a ^ 0. The set of elements
a ^ in Z (X) is denoted by N (X) ; it is the set of mappings of X into N of finite
support and it is a submonoid of Z (X) called the free commutative monoid con-
structed on X. The elements of length 1 are the minimal elements in N (X) — {0}
and constitute the set of $ x (xeX).

The monoid N (X) and the group Z &lt;x) enjoy the following universal property.

Proposition 10. Let M be a commutative monoid (resp. group) andfa mapping of
X into M. There exists one and only one homomorphism o/"N (X) (resp. Z (X) ) into Msuch

92



FREE COMMUTATIVE GROUPS AND MONOIDS § 7.7

thatg($ x ) = f(x) for all x eX. If 'Mis written additively, then g(a.) = 2* a(#) .fix)
for all a in N (x) (resp. Z &lt;X) ).

Let g be a homomorphism of N (X) (resp. Z (X) ) into M such tha.tg(^ x ) = f(x)
for all x e X. For all a in N (X) (resp. Z (X) ), it follows from (12) that

*(*) = ^ x «(*) •£(**) = ^ «(*) •/(*),
whence the uniqueness of g.

For all a in N (X) (resp. Z (X) ) we write g(x) = 2i, a(#) .f(x). Then obviously
^(0) = 0; for a, £ in N (x) (resp. Z&lt; x &gt;),

*(a + P)= J^ («(*)+ p(*))./(*)

= 2ja(*)/(*)+p(*) ./(*)]

= 2 x a(x)./W+ 2 x pw-/w

= *(a) + *(P)
and hence g is a homomorphism of N (x) (resp. Z (X) ) into M. Also, for y in X,

g{&amp;) = 2^*) •/(*);

now $„(*) ./(*) = for x ^ y and \{y) .f{y) =/(y), whence $(&amp;„) =/(y).

Let m : X -&gt; Y be a mapping. By Proposition 10 there exists one and only one
homomorphism of Z (X) into Z (Y) which maps § x to 8 uU) for all x e X. It is de-
noted by Z (u) ; it is immediately seen that it maps &lt;xeZ (X) to the element
P e Z&lt; Y) defined by

(15) p(y) = 2 &lt;x(*).

As in the case of magmas (no. 1), the formula Z (rou) = Z (v) o Z (2/) is established
for every mapping v : Y -&gt; Z ; it is also shown that Z (M) is injective (resp. sur-
jective, bijective) if u is.

Let S be a subset of X; if i is the injection of S into X, the mapping/ = Z (i)
is an isomorphism of Z (S) onto the subgroup H of Z (X) generated by the elements
8 s forjeS. By (15),



(/(«»(*) ={f&gt; %:



eS
eX -S



93



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

and therefore H is the set of elements of Z (X) of support contained in S. Hence-
forth Z (s) will be identified with H by means of/.

Formula (15) shows that the restriction of Z (tt) to N (x) induces a homomor-
phism N (u) of N (X) into N (Y) . Then N v ° u &gt; = N (v) o N (u) for every mapping
v: Y-&gt; Z; further, N (u) is injective (resp. surjective, bijective) if u is. If S is a
subset of X,

N (s&gt; = 2(8) n n (X) .

Remark. Let M be the multiplicative monoid of strictly positive integers and
let &lt;$ be the set of prime numbers (§ 4, no. 10, Definition 15). By Proposi-
tion 10 there exists a homomorphism u of N ( * ) into M characterized by

u(8 p ) = p for every prime number/). Then «(a) = 1 1 /&gt; a(p) for a in N^ and

Theorem 7 of § 4, no. 10 shows that u is an isomorphism of N ( * } onto H.

8. EXPONENTIAL NOTATION

Let M be a monoid, written multiplicatively, and u = (u x ) xeX a family of
elements of M, commuting in pairs. Let a be in N (X) ; the elements u x w and
uf y) of M commute for x, y in X and there exists a finite subset S of X such that
M a(*) _ i for x in X — S. We may therefore write:



(16)



u« = EI !#*&gt;.



Let M' be the submonoid of M generated by the family (u x ) xeX ; it is com-
mutative (§ 1, no. 5, Corollary 2 to Proposition 4). There thus exists (no. 7,
Proposition 10) a unique homomorphism/ of N (X) into M' such that/(8 A .) = u x
for all x e X and /(a) = u a for all a in N (X) . We deduce the following for-
mulae

(17) u a+(J = u^u 6

(18) u° = 1

(19) u 5 * = u x

for a, p in N (X) and x in X.

Let v = (v x ) xeK be another family of elements of M; suppose that
v x v y = v y v x and u x v y = v y u x for x, y in X. Then there exists (§ 1, no. 5,
Corollary 2 to Proposition 4) a commutative submonoid L of M such that
u x e~L and v x eh for all xgX. The mapping a »-&gt; u a . z&gt; a of N (X) into L is then
a homomorphism (§ 1, no. 5, Proposition 5) mapping B x to u x .v x . Thus we
have the formula

(20) u a .v a = (u.v) a ,

where u.v is the family (u x .v x ) xeX -
94



RELATIONS BETWEEN THE VARIOUS FREE OBJECTS § 7.9

When M is commutative, u a can be defined for every family u of elements
of M and formulae (15) to (20) hold without restriction.

9. RELATIONS BETWEEN THE VARIOUS FREE OBJECTS

As the free monoid Mo(X) is a magma, Proposition 1, of no. 1 shows the exis-
tence of a homomorphism X: M(X) -&gt;■ Mo(X) whose restriction to X is the
identity. Similarly, as the free group F(X) is a monoid the identity mapping of
X extends to a homomorphism [x: Mo(X) -&gt;F(X) (no. 2, Proposition 3).
By no. 4, Proposition 6 and no. 5, Proposition 7, (x is injective. Similarly
Proposition 10 of no. 7 and Proposition 8 of no. 5 show the existence of homo-
morphisms v: Mo(X) -&gt; N (X) and 7c: F(X) -&gt; Z (X) characterized by v(#) = $ x
and tz(x) = 8* for all x e X. If i is the injection of N (X) into Z (X) , the two homo-
morphisms i o v and n o ^ of Mo(X) into Z (X) coincide on X, whence
i o v = 7c o \l. The situation may be summarized by the following commutative
diagram:

M(X) -^&gt; Mo(X) -^&gt; N (x)

F(X) — ^-» Z (x &gt;.
The homomorphisms X, [i, v and n will be called canonical.

Let w be in M(X) ; it is immediately shown by induction on l(w) that the
length of the word \(w) is equal to that of w. Moreover

n

(21) v^.,.0 =2^,

for x lt ...,x n in X, whence |v(^. . .x n )\ = n by (13) and (14). In other
words,

(22) |v(«)| =/(a) (aeMo(X)).

Proposition 11. The canonical homomorphism v o/ Mo(X) into N (X) is surjective.
Let w = x x . . .x n and w' = x[. . .x' m be two elements of Mo(X); in order that
v(w) = v(w'), it is necessary and sufficient that m = n and that there exist a permutation
a e n with x[ = x a(i) for 1 &lt; i &lt; n.

The image of v is a submonoid I of N (X) containing the elements B x (for
xeX). Formula (12) (no. 7) shows that N (X) is generated by the family
(K)xex&gt; where I = N (x) . Therefore v is surjective.

If m = n and x' t = x a(i) for 1 &lt; i 4, n, then

n n n

v(a/) = 2 Ku = 2 k ow = 2 * xt = v(«o

by formula (21) and the commutativity theorem (§ 1, no. 5, Theorem 2).

95



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Conversely, suppose that v(w) and v(«/) are equal to the same element &lt;x of
N°°; by formula (22), n = |a| = m. For all x 6 X, let I* (resp. l' x ) be the set of
integers i such that 1 ^ i &lt; n and Xj = x (resp. xj = x). Hence (I x ) xeX and
(I*)*ex ar e partitions of the interval (1, n) of N; further, the formula

n

a = Z, 8*, shows that a(x) is the cardinal of 1^.; similarly the formula

n

a = Zv 8^, shows that ol(x) is the cardinal of I*. There thus exists a permutation
a of (1, w) such that ct(I^) = I* for all x e X, that is *,' = x aii) for i = 1, . . . , w.

Remark. Let S be a subset of X. Recall that we have identified M(S) with
a submagma of M(X), Mo(S) with a submonoid of Mo(X) and N (S) with a
submonoid of N (X) . Then

(23) M(S) = X" 1 (Mo(S)).

Clearly X(M(S)) &lt;= Mo(S). Let w e X _1 (Mo(S)) ; we show by induction on
/ (w) that rueM(S). It is obvious if l(w) = l.IfZ(w) &gt; 1, we may write w = w i w 2
with w x , w 2 e M(X), l{w x ) &lt; l(w), l(w 2 ) &lt; l(w). Then X^^X^) eMo(S),
hence X(ze&gt; x ) e Mo(S) and \(w 2 ) e Mo(S), whence w x e M(S) and w 2 e M(S)
by the induction hypothesis and finally i»eM(S).

Also

(24) Mo(S) = v- x (N (s) ).

This follows immediately from formula (21).

Further, N (S) is the set of elements of N (X) whose support is contained in S;

if (S,)isi is a family of subsets of X of intersection S, then N (S) = H N (S i&gt; and

formulae (23) and (24) imply

(25) M(S) = H M(S,), Mo(S) = H Mo(S { ).

§8. RINGS

1. RINGS

Definition 1 . A ring is a set A with two laws of composition called respectively
addition and multiplication, satisfying the following axioms:

(AN I) Under addition A is a commutative group.
(AN II) Multiplication is associative and possesses an identity element.
(AN III) Multiplication is distributive with respect to addition.
The ring A is said to be commutative if its multiplication is commutative.

96



RINGS § 8.1

In what follows, (x, y) h-&gt; x + y denotes addition and (x, y) v-*- xy multi-
plication; denotes the identity element for addition and 1 that for multi-
plication. Finally, —x denotes the negative of x under addition. The axioms of
a ring are therefore expressed by the following identities :

(1) x + (y + z) = (x + y) + z (associativity of addition)

(2) x + y = y + x (commutativity of addition)

(3) + x = x + = x (zero)

(4) x + (—x) = (—x) + x = (negative)

(5) x{yz) = (xy)z (associativity of multiplication)

(6) x.l = \.x = x (unit element)

(7) (x + y) .z = xz + uz *\ . ,. .. ...

(8) x.(a + z)-xg + *z j^tnbuUvity)

Finally the ring A is commutative if xy = yx for x, y in A.

With addition alone A is a commutative group called the additive group of A.
For all x e A, we define the left homothety y x and right homothety 8* by
Y*(y) = xy, 8*(y) =yx. By formulae (7) and (8), y x and 8* are endomor-
phisms of the additive group of A and thus map zero to zero and negative to
negative. Therefore

(9) *.0 = 0.* =

(10) x.(-y) = (~x).y = -xy;

it follows that (—x) {—y) = —((—x).y) = —(—xy), whence

(11) {-x)(-y)=xy.

Formulae (10) and (11) constitute the sign rule. It follows that

— x = (— l)x = x(— 1)

and(-l)(-l) = 1.

From (11) it follows by induction on n that



(12) ("*) n = {_fn



if n is even
if n is odd.



When we speak of cancellable elements, invertible elements, permutable elements,
central elements, centralizer or centre of a ring A, all these notions will refer to the
multiplication on A. If x, y e A and# is invertible, the element xy " * of A is also
denoted by x\y when A is commutative. The set of invertible elements of A is
stable under multiplication. Under the law induced by multiplication it is a
group called the multiplicative group of A, sometimes denoted by A*.

Let x, y be in A. x is said to be a left (resp. right) multiple of y if there exists
y' eA such that * = y'y (resp. x = yy') ; it is also said that y is a right (resp.

97



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

left) divisor ofx. When A is commutative, there is no need to distinguish between
"left" and "right".

In conformity with the above terminology, every element y e A would be
considered as a right and left divisor of 0; but, by an abuse of language, in
general the term "right (resp. left) divisor o/O" is reserved for elements y such
that there exists x ^ in A satisfying the relation xy = (resp. yx = 0). In
other words, the right (resp. left) divisors of zero are the right (resp. left) non-
cancellable elements.

Let x £ A. x is called nilpotent if there exists an integer n &gt; with x n = 0. The
element 1 — x is then invertible, with inverse equal to

1 + x + x 2 +•••+ x 11 ' 1 .

As A is a commutative group under addition, the element nx for n e Z and
x e A has been defined ■(§ 2, no. 8). As y x and 8* are endomorphisms of the
additive group A, y x (ny) = ny x (y) and b y (nx) = nS v (x), whence

x.(ny) = (nx).y = n.(xy).

In particular, nx = (n. l)x.

A set A with addition and multiplication satisfying the axioms of a ring with
the exception of that assuring the existence of the identity element under
multiplication, is called a pseudo-ring.

2. CONSEQUENCES OF DISTRIBUTTVITY

Distributivity of multiplication with respect to addition allows us to apply
Proposition 1 of § 3, no. 4, which gives

n w

(i3) n(2 * &lt;x ) = 2 n* ( , a ,

where the sum extends over all sequences (a l5 . . . , a n ) belonging to
L x x • • • x L n and for i = 1, . . . , n the family (#,, K ) KeIui of elements of the ring
A is of finite support.

Proposition 1. Let Abe a commutative ring and (x K ) Keh a finite family of elements

of A. For every family of positive integers (3 = (POxeL.5 let \$\ = 2^ p v Then

(") (2*)"- 2 -r^-n*.

We apply formula (13) with L, = L and x i&gt;K = x K for 1 ^ i &lt; n. Then

the sum extending over all sequences a = (a ls . . . , a n ) e L n .
98



CONSEQUENCES OF DISTRIBUTIVITY § 8.2

Let a be in L n ; for all XgL let U" denote the set of integers i such that
1 ^ i ^ n and a, = X and let O(a) = (Uj) XsL . It is immediate that O is a
bijection of L n onto the set of partitions of {1, 2, . . ., »} indexed by L. For all
(J e N L such that | p | = n, let L£ denote the set of a e L n such that Card Ug = p x
for all X 6 L. It follows that the family (Lp) , =n is a partition of L n and that

Card LS = n!



(§5, no. 5).
Finally, for a e Lp,



whence



..*„.= n ru-nru-n* fc ,

y _ t y

= 22 n^



'^•n ft






XeL



and formula (14) thus follows from (15).

Corollary 1 (binomial formula). Let x and y be two elements of a commutative
ring A. Then :

n

(*+y)" = 2 o (^ p y n " p .
Formula (14) applied to L = {1, 2}, x x = x and x 2 = y gives

ITT * V,

the sum extending over ordered pairs of positive integers p, q Withp + q = n.
The binomial formula follows immediately from this (Set Theory, III, § 5,
no. 8).

Corollary 2. Let A be a commutative ring, X a set, u = (u x ) xeX andv = (v x ) xeX
two families of elements of A. Let u + v denote the family (u x + v x ) xeX . For all

X g N (X) we write X! = IT. X(*) !. Then for all a e N&lt; X) , in the notation of§ 7, no. 8,



(u + v) a = 2



■uV.



P + Y = a p! y!

99



ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

For x e X,



m + n=a(x)m!n!



by Corollary 1 . Taking the product of these equations for x e X and using (13),
we obtain the corollary.

Proposition 2. Let Abe a ring, x x , . . . , x n elements of A and I = {1, 2, . . . , «}. For
H c: I, we write x s = 2-, x t . Then



(16) (-1)» 2 * a(1) . . .x am = 2 (-1)°««(*h)".

In particular, if A is commutative,

{-\yn\x x x 2 . . .x n = h 2 (-l) CardH (* H )\

Let C be the set of mappings of I into {0, 1}. If each H &lt;= I is mapped to its
characteristic function, a bijection is obtained of $P(I) onto G. The right hand
side of (16) is thus equal to:

2 (_l)«(l) + - + a(n)(2 fl (jv] n
aeC v ' \iel s ' I

= 2 (-l)«&lt;w + - + «&lt;»&gt; 2 a(i 1 )...a(i n )x h ...x in

y

where

c h .. An = 2 c (-l)^ + - + ^Mzx). . .«(»„).

(1) Suppose that (z' l5 . . . , /„) is not a permutation of I. There exists ajel
distinct from i lt . . ., i n . Let C be the set of a e C such that 0(7) = 0. For all
a e C, let a* be the sum of a and the characteristic function of { j}. Then
fl*(l) + • • • + a*(w) = a(l) + • • • + a(n) + 1 and hence

CU...U = 2 (-l)^&gt; + "- + aW &lt;f 1 )...^ n ) + (-l) a * (1) + "- + a * (n) «*(ii)...a*(0

aeC

= 2 ((_l)aCi) + -+&lt;»&gt; + (-l) a &lt; 1 &gt; + - + a(n) + 1 )a(z" 1 )...a(s' n ) = 0.

aeC

(2) Suppose that there exists «re6 n such that i t = a(l), . . ., z n = &lt;y(«).
Then a^) . . .a(i n ) = unless a only takes the value 1. Thus c h „ An = (— l) n .

100



EXAMPLES OF RINGS § 8.3



3. EXAMPLES OF RINGS



I. Zero ring. Let A be a ring. For = 1 in A, it is necessary and sufficient that
A consist of a single element. The condition is obviously sufficient. On the other
hand, if = 1, then, for all x e A, x = x. 1 = x.O = 0. Such a ring is called a
zero ring.

II. Ring of rational integers. With the addition defined in § 2, no. 5, and the
multiplication defined in § 2, no. 6, Z is a commutative ring. The notation 0,
1,— # is in accordance with the notation introduced earlier.

*III. Ring of real-valued functions. Let I be an interval in the set R of real
numbers and let A be the set of continuous functions defined on I with real
values. The sum/ + g and product/, g of two functions/ and g are defined by

(/+*)(') =/(0 + §(*)&gt; UfcXO =/(0*(0 ('e i).

A commutative ring is obtained whose unit element is the constant 1.*

*IV. Convolution pseudo-ring. Let E be the set of real-valued continuous
functions on R, which are zero outside a bounded interval. The sum of two
functions is defined as in III, but the product is now defined by



J — oo



("convolution product"). Thus a commutative pseudo-ring is obtained which
is not a ring (cf. Integration, VIII, §4). #

V. Opposite ring of a ring A. Let A be a ring. The set A with the same addition
as A and the multiplication (x,y) *-+yx is often denoted by A . It is a ring
(called the opposite ring of A) with the same zero and same unit as A and
which coincides with A if and only if A is commutative.

VI. Endomorphism ring of a commutative group. Let G be a commutative group
written additively. Let E denote the set of endomorphisms of G. Given /and
g in E, the mappings/ + g and fg of G into G are defined by

By § 1, no. 5, Proposition 5,/ + g is an endomorphism of G and so obviously
also is fg =f°g. By §4, no. 8, E is a (commutative) group under addition.
Multiplication is obviously associative and has identity element Id G . Also for
/ g and h in E, we write cf&gt; = /. (g + h) ; for all x eG,

*(*) =/((* + *)(*)) =/(*(*) + K*)) =f(g(*)) +/(*(*))

for/ is an endomorphism of G; hence § =fg +fh and clearly

(g + h)f=gf+hf.

101



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Therefore E is a (not in general commutative) ring called the endomorphism ring
o/G.

VII. Pseudo-ring of zero square. A pseudo-ring A is said to be of zero square if
xy = for all x, y e A. Let G be a commutative group. If the set G is given the
addition of the group G and multiplication (x, y) h-&gt; 0, a pseudo-ring of zero
square is obtained. It is only a ring if G = {0}, in which case it is the zero
ring.

4. RING HOMOMORPHISMS

Definition 2. Let A andB be two rings. A morphism, or homomorphism, of A into B
is any mappingfofA into B satisfying the relations:

(17) /(* + y) =/(*) +/(y), fto) =/(*) •/(?), /(i) = 1,

for all x, y in A.

The composition of two ring homomorphisms is a ring homomorphism. Let
A and B be two rings and/a mapping of A into B; for/ to be an isomorphism,
it is necessary and sufficient that it be a bijective homomorphism; in that case,

/ is a homomorphism of B into A. A homomorphism of a ring A into itself
is called an endomorphism of A.

Let/: A -&gt; B be a ring homomorphism. The mapping/is a homomorphism
of the additive group of A into the additive group of B; in particular, /(0) =
and/(— x) = —f(x) for all x e A. The image under/ of an invertible element
of A is an invertible element of B and / induces a homomorphism of the
multiplicative group of A into the multiplicative group of B.

Examples. (1) Let A be a ring. It is immediately seen that the mapping
n h-&gt; n . 1 of Z into A is the unique homomorphism of Z into A. In particular,
the identity mapping of Z is the unique endomorphism of the ring Z.

In particular, take A to be the endomorphism ring of the additive group
Z (no. 3, Example VI). The mapping n i-&gt; n. 1 of Z into A is an isomorphism
of Z onto A by the very construction of multiplication in Z (§ 2, no. 6).

(2) Let a be an invertible element of a ring A. The mapping #i-&gt; axa' 1
is an endomorphism of A for

a(x + y)a~ x = axa' 1 + aya' 1 ,
aixy)^ 1 = (axa-^iaya -1 ).

It is bijective, for the relation x' = axa' 1 is equivalent tox = a~ 1 x'a. It is
therefore an automorphism of the ring A, called the inner automorphism asso-
ciated with a.

102



IDEALS § 8.6

5. SUBRINGS

Definition 3. Let Abe a ring. A subring of A is any subset B of A which is a subgroup
of A under addition, which is stable under multiplication and which contains the unit of A.

The above conditions may be written as follows

OeB, B + BcB, -B &lt;= B, B.B c B, leB.

If B is a subring of A, it is given the addition and multiplication induced by

those on A, which make it into a ring. The canonical injection of B into A is a
ring homomorphism.

Examples. (1) Every subgroup of the additive group Z which contains 1 is
equal to Z. Thus Z is the only subring of Z.

(2) Let A be a ring and (A t ) ieI a family of subrings of A ; it is immediate that

(l A t is a subring of A. In particular, the intersection of the subrings of A

containing a subset X of A is a subring called the subring of A generated by X.

(3) Let X be a subset of a ring A. The centralizer of X in A is a subring of A.
In particular, the centre of A is a subring of A.

(4) Let G be a commutative group with operators; let Q denote the set of
operators and a H&gt;/ a the action of Q on G. Let E be the endomorphism ring
of the group without operators G and F the set of endomorphisms of the group
with operators G. By definition, F consists of the endomorphisms (j&gt; of G such
that § ./ a = /« . &lt;j&gt; for all a e Q. Therefore F is a subring of the ring E. F is
called the endomorphism ring of the group with operators G (cf. II, § 1, no. 2). Let F x
be the subring of E generated by the/ a . Then F is the centralizer of F x in E.

6. IDEALS

Definition 4. Let Abe a ring. A subset a of A is called a left (resp. right) ideal if it
is a subgroup of the additive group of A and the relations a e A, x £ o imply ax e a
(resp. xaea). a is called a two-sided ideal of A if it is both a left ideal and a right ideal
of A.

The definition of a left ideal may be expressed by the relations

Oea, a + a c a, A.aca

the relation — o &lt;= a following from the formula ( — l).x = —x and A. a c: a.
For all xeA, let y x be the mapping a\-&gt; xa of A into A; the action x ■-&gt; y x
gives the additive group A + of A the structure of a group with operators
with A as set of operators. The left ideals of A are just the subgroups of A +
which are stable under this action.

The left ideals in the ring A are just the right ideals of the opposite ring A .
In a commutative ring the three species of ideals are the same; they are simply
called ideals.

103



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Examples. (1) Let A be a ring. The set A is a two-sided ideal of A; so is the
set consisting of 0, which is called the zero ideal and sometimes denoted by
or (0) instead of {0}.

(2) For every element a of A, the set A. a of left multiples of a is a left
ideal; similarly the set a. A is a right ideal. When a is in the centre of A,
A. a = a. A; this ideal is called the principal ideal generated by a and is
denoted by (a) . (a) = A if and only if a is invertible.

(3) Let M be a subset of A. The set of elements xe A such that xy =
for all y e M is a left ideal of A called the left annihilator of M. The right
annihilator of M is defined similarly.

(4) Every intersection of left (resp. right, two-sided) of A is a left (resp.
right, two-sided) ideal. Given a subset X of A, there thus exists a smallest
left (resp. right, two-sided) ideal containing X; it is called the left (resp.
right, two-sided) ideal generated by X.

Let a be a left ideal of A. The conditions 1 £ a, a ^ A are obviously equiva-
lent.

Definition 5. Let A be a ring. By an abuse of language, a left ideal a is said to be
maximal if it is a maximal element of the set of left ideals distinct from A.

In other words, a is maximal if a ^ A and the only left ideals of A containing
a are a and A.

Theorem 1 (Krull). Let Abe a ring and a a left ideal of A distinct from A. There
exists a maximal ideal mo/A containing a.

Consider A as operating on the additive group A + of A by left multiplication.
Then the left ideals of A are the stable subgroups of A + . The theorem thus
follows from § 4, no. 3, Proposition 3 applied to the subset P = {1} of A + .

Proposition 3. Let Abe a ring, (x K ) ket , a family of elements of A and a (resp. b) the
set of sums 2 a k x K where (a K ) Ketl w a family with finite support of elements of A (resp.

Z, a x xJb K where (a x ) KeLl , (^OxeL are families with finite support of elements of A).
Then a (resp. b) is the left (resp. two-sided) ideal of A generated by the elements x K .
The formulae

(18) °=2 L 0.^

(19) 2 a K x K + 2 t flX = 2 (a K + a' x )x x

(20) a. 2 a K x K = 2 (aa K )x K

prove that a is a left ideal. Let a' be a left ideal such that x K e a' for all X e L and

104



QUOTIENT RINGS § 8.7

let (a k ) Keh be a family with finite support in A. Then a K x K e a' for all XeL,
whence 2-, a K x K e a'; hence a cz a'. Hence a is the left ideal of A generated by

X 6 Jj

the at x . The argument for b is analogous.

Proposition 4. Le£ A be a ring and ((X^^ei. a family of left ideals of A. The left ideal

generateihy U ^consists of t ke sum I * .here (y^is afvnilywith fi*Ue sup-

Kg Li XeL

jborf .tmcA £Aa£ y % e a^ybr a// XeL.

Let a be the set of sums 2* y K with y K e &lt;x K for all XeL. The formulae
2, x x + 2-, u x = Z, (x x + y » ) and a. 2* Xi = 2, ax x shows that a is a left

XeL A XeL^* X e L V * aA ' XeL * XeL *

ideal of A. Let XeL and x e &lt;x K ; write y*. = x and y u = for \x ^ X; then
x = 2« y K &gt; whence a: e o and finally a x c: a. If a left ideal a' contains a^, for all
X e L, it obviously contains a and hence a is generated by U a K .

The ideal o generated by U a x is called the sum of the left ideals &lt;x K and is

K e Li

denoted by 2, a K (cf. II, § 1, no. 7). In particular, the sum o x + a 2 of the two

X e L

left ideals consists of the sums a x + a 2 where a± e a x and a 2 e a 2 .

7. QUOTIENT RINGS

Let A be a ring. If o is a two-sided ideal of A, two elements x and y of A are
said to be congruent modulo a, written x = y (mod. a) or x = #(a), if * —yea.
This is an equivalence relation on A. The relations x = y(a) and *' = y'(a)
imply x + x' — y + y'(&lt;x), xx' = xy'(a) for a is a left ideal and xy' = yy'(a) for
o is a right ideal, whence xx' =yy'(a). Conversely, if R is an equivalence
relation on A compatible with addition and multiplication, the set a of x =
mod. R is a two-sided ideal and x = y mod. R is equivalent to x = y mod. a.

Let A be a ring and a a two-sided ideal of A. A/a denotes the quotient set of
A by the equivalence relation x = y(a), with addition and multiplication the
quotients of those on A (§ 1 , no. 6, Definition 11). We show that A/a is a ring :

(a) Under addition, A/a is the quotient commutative group of the additive
group of A by the subgroup a.

(b) Under multiplication, A/a is a monoid (§ 2, no. 1).

(c) Let £, y), £ be in A/a and let tc : A -&gt; A/a be the canonical mapping; we
choose elements x, y, zin A such that tz(x) = £, iz(y) = ?j and tz(z) = £. Then

S(t) + K) = n(x)it(y + z) = n(x(y + z)) = n{xy + xz)
= n(x)Ti(y) + tz(x)tz(z) = £/) + ^

and the relation (£ + ■/;)£ = ££ + •»£ is established similarly.

105



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Definition 6. Let Abe a ring and a a two-sided ideal of A. The quotient ring of A by
a, denoted by A/a, is the quotient set of A by the equivalence relation x = y(a), with
addition and multiplication the quotients of those on A.

The ring A/{0} is isomorphic to A and A/A is a zero ring.

Theorem 2. Let A be a ring and a a two-sided ideal of A.

(a) The canonical mapping izofA onto A/a is a ring homomorphism.

(b) Let B be a ring and fa homomorphism of A into B. Iff{a) = {0}, there exists
one and only one homomorphism f of A/ 'a into B such thatf =f° tc.

By construction, n(x + y) — tz(x) + Tz(y) and 7z(xy) = iz(x)-n:(y) for x, y
in A; also tc(1) is the unit s of A/a, whence (a).

Let A + be the additive group of A and B + that of B; as/ is a homomorphism
of A + into B + , zero on the subgroup a of A + , there exists (§4, no. 4,
Proposition 5) one and only one homomorphism /'of A + /a into B + such that
f = foTz. Let £, 7) be in A/a; choose x, y in A with n(x) = £ and iz(y) = 7j;
then £/] = Ttixy), whence

im =/(*(*?)) =f(*y) =f(*)-f(y) =M)-f^)

and/(s) =/(w(l)) =/(l), hence/is a ring homomorphism.

Theorem 3. Let A and B be rings and fa homomorphism of A into B.

(a) The kernel a off is a two-sided ideal ofB.

(b) The image B' =/(B) off is a subring ofB.

(c) Let 7i : A -» A/ a and i: B' — &gt;■ B fo ffo canonical morphisms. There exists one
and only one morphismf 'of 'A/a mfo B' .rucA thatf = i ofo tc and f is an isomorphism.

As/ is a morphism of the additive group of A into that of B, a is a subgroup
of A. If x e a and a e A, then f (ax) = f(a)f(x) = 0, hence ax e a and similarly
xaea; hence a is a two-sided ideal of A. Assertion (b) is obvious. As/is zero on
a, there exists a morphism/of A/a into B' such that/ = iofon (Theorem 2).
The uniqueness off and the fact that / is an isomorphism follow from Set
Theory, II, § 6, no. 4.

8. SUBRINGS AND IDEALS IN A QUOTIENT RING

Proposition 5. Let A and A' be two rings, fa homomorphism of A into A' and a the
kernel off.

(a) Let B' be a subring of A'. Then B = /(B') is a subring of A containing a.
Iff is surjective, thenf(B) = B' andf \ B defines when passing to the quotient an iso-
morphism ofBja onto B'.

(b) Let b' be a left (resp. right, two-sided) ideal of A'. Then b = /(&amp;') is a left
(resp. right, two-sided) ideal of A containing a.

106



MULTIPLICATION OF IDEALS § 8.9

(c) If b' is a two-sided ideal of A', the composite mapping of the canonical morphism
A' -&gt; A'jb' andf: A -&gt; A' defines, when passing to the quotient, an injective morphism f
ofAjb into A'/b'. Iff is surjective,/ is an isomorphism of A/b onto A'fb'.

(d) Suppose f is surjective. Let O be the set ofsubrings (resp. left ideals, right ideals,
two-sided ideals) of A containing a. Let O' be the set ofsubrings (resp. left ideals, right

ideals, two-sided ideals) of A'. The mappings B -*-/(B) and B' n-&gt; / (B') are inverse
bisections of O onto O' and O' onto O.

(a) and (b) are obvious, except the last assertion of (a) which follows from
no. 7, Theorem 3.

The composite morphism g: A -&gt; A' -&gt; A'jb' considered in (c) has kernel b
and hence/is an injective morphism of A/b into A'jb' (§ 8, no. 7, Theorem 3).
If/* is surjective, g is surjective and hence/is surjective.

Suppose / is surjective. By the above, the mapping 6 : B' t-*- f (B') is a
mapping of O' into O. Clearly the mapping v) : B ^/(B) is a mapping of O into
O'. Then o tj = Id ft , 7) o = Id^, whence (d).

Remark. In the above notation, and tj are ordered set isomorphisms (&lt;J&gt; and O'
being ordered by inclusion) .

Corollary. Let A be a ring and a a two-sided ideal of A.

(a) Every left (resp. right, two-sided) ideal of A/a can be written uniquely in the form
b/a, where b is a left (resp. right, two-sided) ideal of A containing a.

(b) Ifbis two-sided, the composite homomorphism A-&gt; A/a-&gt; (A/o)/(b/o) defines
when passing to the quotient an isomorphism of A/b onto (A/a)/(b/a).

It suffices to apply Proposition 5 to the canonical morphism of A onto

A/a.

9. MULTIPLICATION OF IDEALS

Let A be a ring and a and b two-sided ideals of A. The set of elements of the

form x x y x -\ h x n y n with n &gt; 0, x t e a andy { e b for 1 ^ t &lt; n, is obviously

a two-sided ideal of A, which is denoted by ab and called the product of the two-
sided ideals a and b. Under this multiplication, the set of two-sided ideals of A
is a monoid with unit element the two-sided ideal A. If a, b, c are two-sided
ideals of A, then a (b + c) = ab + ac, (b + c)a = ba + ca. If A is commutative,
multiplication of ideals is commutative.
ab c aA c a and ab &lt;=■ Ab c b, hence

(21) ab c anb.

Proposition 6. Let a, b 1} . . ., b n be two-sided ideals of A. If A = a + b t for all
i, then A — a + b x b 2 . . ,b n = a + (b x r\b 2 n- • -n b n ).

107



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

By (21) it suffices to prove that A = a + bi&amp; 2 - • • *V By induction, it suffices
to consider the case where n = 2. By hypothesis, there exist a, a' e a, b x e b x ,
b 2 e b 2 such that 1 = a + b x = a' + b 2 . Then

1 = a' + (a + b x )b 2 = (a' + ab 2 ) + b x b 2 e a + b x b 2 ,

whence A = a + b x b 2 .

Proposition 7. Let b x , . . ., b n be two-sided ideals of A such that b { + b y = A for

i # j. Then b x r\b 2 f\- ■ -nb n = Z, b a(1) b a(2) . . . b c(n) . In particular, if A is

oe© n

commutative, b x n b 2 n- • -n b n = b x b 2 . . .b n (cf. Exercise 2).

Suppose first n = 2. There exist a x e b x , a 2 e b 2 such that a x + a 2 = 1.
If xebjfi b 2 , then a: = *(«! 4- a 2 ) = x^ + xa 2 e b 2 b x + b x b 2 . Hence
f&gt;i n b 2 = b x b 2 + b 2 b x .

Suppose now the equation of the proposition is established for all integers
&lt;n. By Proposition 6, b n + (b x b 2 . . .b n _ x ) = A and hence

b x nb 2 r\---nb n = (b x n b 2 n- • -n b n . x )b n + l&gt; n (f» 1 n() 2 n...nl) n . 1 )

\ a e © n - 1 /

&lt;= Z b T(1) b T(2) . . . b T(n) c^ni&gt; 2 n.-n^

T6©„

10. PRODUCT OF RINGS

Let (Aj){ eI be a family of rings. Let A be the product set 1 1 A t . On A addition

and multiplication are defined by the formulae

(22) (*,) + (y,) = (* t + #,), (*i)(yO = (*#*)•

It is immediately verified that A is a ring called the product of the rings A i5 with
zero the element = (0j) iGl , where 4 is the zero of A { , and unit 1 = (l 1 ) ie i,
where lj is the unit of A { . If the A t are commutative, so is A. If Q is the centre

of At, the centre of A is 1 1 Q.

^' iel l

For all i e I, the projection pr { of A onto A f is a ring homomorphism. If
B is a ring andyj: B -&gt; A { is a family of homomorphisms, there exists a unique
homomorphism f: B -&gt; A such that f = pr { of for all re I ; it is given by

/(*) = C/f(*)W

For all i e I, let &lt;x, be a left ideal of A,. Then a = 1 I a, is a left ideal of A.
There is an analogous result for right ideals, two-sided ideals and subrings.

108



PRODUCT OF RINGS § 8.10

Suppose that a t is a two-sided ideal for all iel and \etf t denote the canonical
mapping of A, onto A,/a,. Then the mapping/: (x,) l6l i-»- {fi(x^) lel of I 1 Aj

onto 1 1 (Aj/a,) is a ring homomorphism of kernel 1 1 ct t and hence defines

when passing to the quotient an isomorphism of (1 lAj/ll 1 oJ onto

(AJa,).

Let (Ix)^ e L be a partition of I. The canonical bijection of 1 1 A { onto

11(11 Aj J is a ring isomorphism, under which these two rings are identified.

Let J cz I. Let e 3 denote the element (x t ) ieI of A defined by x t = l t for i e J,
x t = t for i e I —J. Then e s is a central idempotent (§ 1, no. 4) of A. The
following formulae follow immediately :

e z = 1;
e = 0;
OnK = Vk for J c: I 5 K c: I;

*juk = ej + e K for J cI ) KcIJnK= 0;

2-, e Jh = 1 if (] k ) is a finite partition of I.

Let Aj = 1 1 A t . Let vjj be the canonical projection of A onto Aj. For

x — (^i)i6J e A j5 let ej(x) be the element {y^) iB i of A defined by y, = x t for
* e J&gt; Vi ~ 0i for i e I — J. Then vjj is a ring homomorphism of A onto A j3 ej is
an injective homomorphism of the additive group of Aj onto A and in the
diagram

Aj &gt; A &gt; Aj_j

the kernel &lt;Xj of f] I _ J is equal to the image of Sj. Then tj(xx') = Sj(x)sj(a;') for
all x, x' e Aj; but sj is not in general a ring homomorphism for Sj(l) = ej.
Clearly &lt;*j = £jA = A^j.

Let e {i} = e t and o, = a {0 = e t A = Ae t for all iel. Then ef = e u

etfj = e j e i =

for i 7^ j. If I is finite, then 2, e t = 1, the additive group A is the direct sum

of the two-sided ideals a t and if x e A its component in a, is xe t . The following
proposition is immediately deduced.

Proposition 8. Suppose I is finite. If b is a left or right ideal of A, b is the direct sum
ofthebn a t .

109



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

11. DIRECT DECOMPOSITION OF A RING

Let A be a ring and (b t ) ieI a family of two-sided ideals of A. We shall call the
homomorphism

X h-&gt; (&lt;f&gt;j(*)), 6l ,

where § t is the canonical homomorphism of A onto A/b t , the canonical homo-
morphism of A into 1 1 (A/b,).

Proposition 9. Let A be a ring and (b 1} . . ., b n ) two-sided ideals of A such that

n

b t + bj = A for i ^ j. The canonical homomorphism of A into 1 1 (A/bj) is surjective
of kernel C\ b, = Z b a(1) b a(2) . . .b a(n) .

I — X a 6 ©n

n

Clearly the kernel is (j b^ To prove the surjectivity, it is necessary to show
that, for every family (Xi) 1&lt;i&lt;n of elements of A, there exists xeA such that
x = # t (b t ) for all 1 &lt; i ^ n. We prove this assertion by induction on the
cardinal n of I, the case n &lt; 1 being trivial. By the induction hypothesis, there
exists y e A such that y = x { (b,) for 1 &lt; i &lt; n — 1. We look for an x of the

n-l

formy + z with z e A. Of necessity z = (b 4 ) for z &lt; n, that is z e b = Q b i5

and on the other hand z = x n — y (b n ). Now b n + b = A by no. 9, Proposition
6, whence the existence of z. Finally, the second expression of the kernel follows
from no. 9, Proposition 7.

Definition 7. Let A be a ring. A finite family (b t ) i6l of two-sided ideals of A such

that the canonical homomorphism of A into 1 1 (A/b,) is an isomorphism is called a

direct decomposition of A.

Proposition 10. Let A be a\ing, A' its centre and (bi) ieI a finite family of two-sided
ideals of A. The following conditions are equivalent:

(a) the family (bj) i6l is a direct decomposition of A;

(b) there exists a family (^) ie i of idempotents of A' such that e^j = Ofor i ^ j,

1 = Z!/ e t and b t = A(l — e t ) for iel;

(c) bt + b^ A for i # j and O b t = {0};

(d) b t + by = A for i # j and 1 1 b t — {0}for every total order on I;

(e) there exists a direct decomposition (bj) i6l of A' such that b f = Ab r { for iel.

(a) =&gt; (b). If condition (a) holds, A may be identified with the ring 1 1 (A/bj)
110



DIRECT DECOMPOSITION OF A RING § 8. 1 1

and b, with the kernel of pr t . The existence of the e t with the properties in (b)
then follows from no. 10.

(b) =&gt; (d). Suppose that the e t exist with the properties in (b). For i ^j,
1 — e t e b i} e x = e t (l — e t ) e b Jt hence 1 e b t + b } and A = b t + bj. On the
other hand, if I is given a total ordering and (Ar t ) ieI is a family of elements of A,
then, since the e % are central,

n *,(i - ,) . (n „)(n ( i - *) - (n „)(i - o «) - o

hence ii b, = (0&gt;.

(d) =&gt;- (c). This follows from no. 9, Proposition 7.

(c) =&gt;• (a). This follows from Proposition 9.

Thus conditions (a), (b), (c) and (d) are equivalent. Suppose they hold. By
(b) =&gt; (a), the family of b[ = A'(l - e t ) is a direct decomposition of A'. Then
b { = A(l — e t ) = Abl for all i e I. Hence condition (e) holds.

Finally, suppose condition (e) holds. By (a) =&gt; (b), there exists a family

(*i)iei of idempotents of A' such that e.e^ = for i ^ /, 1 = Z, e, and

b[ = A'(l - e t ) for i e I. Then b 4 = Abi = A(l - e x ) for i e I, hence condition
(b) holds.

Remark. Let A be a ring. Let (a t ) iel be a finite family of subgroups of the addi-
tive group A + of A such that A + is the direct sum of the a f . Suppose a,aj c ai
for i e I and a^ = {0} for i ^ j. Then a t is for all iel a two-sided ideal of A.
With addition and multiplication induced by those on A, a, is a ring with unit

element the component of 1 e A in a { . If b t = i a y , clearly the b t satisfy con-
dition (c) of Proposition 10 and hence (b t ) tel is a direct decomposition of A,
which is said to be defined by (aj) j(



'iel-



Example: Ideals and quotient rings ofL

An ideal of Z is an additive subgroup of Z and hence of the form n . Z with
n ^ ; conversely, for every integer n ^ 0, the set n . Z is an ideal, the principal
ideal (n). Thus every ideal of Z is principal and is represented uniquely in the
form nL with n ^ 0. The ideal (1) is equal to Z, the ideal (0) consists of and
the ideals distinct from Z and {0} are therefore of the form nL with n &gt; 1. If
m ^ 1 and n ^ 1, mL ■=&gt; nL if and only if n e m.Z, that is m divides n. There-
fore, for the ideal nL to be maximal, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist
no integer m &gt; 1 distinct from n and dividing n; in other words, the maximal
ideals ojTL are the ideals of the form pL where p is a prime number (§ 4, no. 10,
Definition 16).

Let m and n be two integers ^ 1. The ideal mL + nL is principal, whence
there is an integer d ^ 1 characterized by dL = rnL + nL\ for every integer

111



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

r ^ 1, the relation "r divides d" is equivalent to rZ =&gt; dZ and hence to
"rZ ^ wZ and rZ =&gt; nZ", that is to "r divides m and n". It is thus seen that the
common divisors of m and n are the divisors of a? and that rf is the greatest of the
divisors ^ 1 common to m and n; d is called ffo greatest common divisor (abbrevi-
ated to g.c.d.) of m and n. As dZ = mZ + nZ, there exist two integers x and y
such that d = mx + ny. m and n are said to be relatively prime if their g.c.d. is
equal to 1 . It amounts to the same to assume that there exist integers x and y
with mx + ny = 1.

The intersection of the ideals mZ and nZ is non-zero for it contains mn and
hence is of the form rZ with r ^ 1 . Arguing as above, it is seen that the multiples
of r are the common multiples of m and n and that r is the least of the integers ^ 1
which are common multiples of m and n; it is called the least common multiple
(l.c.m.) of m and n.

The product of the ideals mZ and nZ is the set of 2* mx^nyi = mn\ 2, # f y 4 1

for %, . . . , y r e Z and hence is equal to mnZ.

For every integer n &gt; 1, the quotient ring Z/nZ is called the rmg of integers
modulo n; it has n elements, which are the classes modulo n of the integers
0, 1, 2, . . ., n — 1. For n = 1, we obtain the zero ring.

Proposition 11. Let n 1} . . .,n d be integers ^ 1 which are relatively prime in pairs and

r

n = «! . . . n r . The canonical homomorphism of Z into the product ring 1 1 Zjn t Z is

r

surjective of kernel nZ and defines a ring isomorphism ofZ/nZ onto 11 ZjnjL.

Let a { = n 4 Z for i — 1, . . ., r. By hypothesis, &lt;x t + a, = Z for z' # J. The
proposition then follows from Proposition 9.

The above results, as also those concerning decomposition into prime factors,
will be generalized in Chapter VII, § 1, which is devoted to the study of princi-
pal ideal domains and in Commutative Algebra, Chapter VII, § 3, which is de-
voted to the study of factorial domains.

12. RINGS OF FRACTIONS

Theorem 4. Let Abe a commutative ring and S a subset of A. Let A s be the monoid of
fractions of A (provided only with multiplication) with denominators in S (§ 2, no. 4).
Let e : A — &gt; A s be the canonical morphism. There exists on A s one and only one addition
satisfying the following conditions:

(a) A s , with this addition and its multiplication, is a commutative ring;

(b) e is a ring homomorphism.

Suppose an addition has been found for A s satisfying conditions (a) and (b).
112



RINGS OF FRACTIONS § 8.12

Let x,ye A s . Let S' be the stable multiplicative submonoid of A generated by
S. There exist a, b e A and p, q e S' such that x = ajp, y = b/q. Then

x = z(aq)z(pq) " x , y = z(bp)e(pq) ~ \
whence

(23) * + y = (i(o?) + z{bp))z{pq) - 1

= e(^ + ^)e(/» ? )- 1
= («? + bp)jpq.

This proves the uniqueness of the addition.

We now define an addition on A s by setting x + y = (aq + bp)jpq. It is
necessary to show that this definition does not depend on the choice of a, b, p, q.
Now, if a', V e A,p', q' e S' are such that x = a\p' ,y = b'/q', there exist s and
t in S' such that ap's = a'ps, bq't = b'qt, whence

(aq + bp){ P 'q')(st) = (a'q' + b'p')( P q)(st)
and hence

(aq + b P )lpq = (a'q' + b'p')\p'q'.

It is easily verified that addition in A s is associative and commutative, that
0/1 is identity element for addition, that ( — a)jp is the negative of ajp and that
x(y + z) = xy + xz for all x,y, ze A s . If a, b e A, then

e(a + b) = (a + b)j\ = a\\ + bjl = z(a) + e(b)

and hence s is a ring homomorphism.

Definition 8. The ring defined in Theorem 4 is called the ring of fractions associated
with S, or with denominators in S, and is denoted by A[S -1 ].

The zero of AfS" 1 ] is 0/1, the unit of Aj^" 1 ] is 1/1.

We shall return to the properties of A[S _1 ] in Commutative Algebra, Chapter
II, §2.

If S is the set of cancellable elements of A, the ring A[S -1 ] is called the total
ring of fractions of A. A is then identified with a subring of A[S ~ - 1 ] by means of
the mapping s, which is then injective (I, § 2, no. 4, Proposition 6).

Theorem 5. Let Abe a commutative ring, S a subset of A, B a ring and fa homomor-
phism of A into B such that every element off(S) is invertible. There exists one and only
onefqfA[S~ 1 ] l into B such thatf = f° e.

We know (§ 2, no. 4, Theorem 1) that there exists one and only one mor-
phism/of the multiplicative monoid A[S _1 ] into the multiplicative monoid
B such that/ — J° s. Let a, b e A, p, q e S' (stable multiplicative submonoid

113



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

of A generated by S). As the elements of/*(A) commute in pairs,

JifllP + big) =Maq + bp)jpq) = f{aq + bp)f{pq)~ 1
= (/(«)/(?) +f(b)f(P))f(P)- 1 f(q)- 1
= f(")f(P)- 1 +f(l&gt;)f(q)- 1
= f(alP) +/(%)•
Hence fis a ring homomorphism.

§9. FIELDS



1. FIELDS

Definition 1 . A ring K is called afield if it does not consist only o/O and every non-zero
element q/K. is invertible.

The set of non-zero elements of the field K, with multiplication, is a group,
which is precisely the multiplicative group K* of the ring K (§ 8, no. 1 ) . The
opposite ring of a field is a field. A field is called commutative if its multiplication
is commutative; such a field is identified with its opposite. A non-commutative
field is sometimes called a skew field.

Examples. *(1) We shall define in no. 4 the field of rational numbers; In
General Topology the field of real numbers will be defined {General Topology,
IV, § 1, no. 3), also the field of complex numbers {General Topology, VIII,
§ 1, no. 1) and the field of quaternions {General Topology, VIII, § 1, no. 4).
These fields are commutative with the exception of the field of quaternions. #
(2) The ring Z/2Z is obviously a field.

Let K be a field. Every subring L of K which is a field is called a subfield of
K and K is then called an extension field of L; it amounts to the same to say that
L is a subring of K and that x' 1 e L for every non-zero element x of L. If
(Li)iei is a family of subfields of K, then H L 4 is a subfield of K; for every

subset X of K there thus exists a smallest subfield of K containing X; it is said
to be generated by X.

Proposition 1. Let K be afield. For every subset Xo/K, the centralizer (§ 8, no. 5,
Example 3) X' ofK is a subfield o/K.

We know {loc. cit.) that X' is a subring of K. On the other hand, if x =£ is
permutable with z e X, so is a: -1 (I, § 2, no. 3, Proposition 5) and hence X'
contains the inverse of every non-zero element of X'.

Corollary. The centre of afield K is a (commutative) subfield o/K.
114



FIELDS §9.1

Theorem 1. Let Abe a ring. The following conditions are equivalent:

(a) A is afield;

(b) A is not reduced to and the only left ideals of A are and A.

Suppose that A is a field. Then A is not reduced to 0. Let a be a left ideal of
A distinct from 0. There exists a non-zero a belonging to a. For all x e A,
x = (xa~ x )a e a; hence a = A.

Suppose that A satisfies condition (b). Let x # be in A. We need to prove
that x is invertible. The left ideal Ax contains x and hence is not zero, whence
A* = A. There thus exists x' eA such that x'x = 1. Then x' # since 1 ^ 0.
Applying the above result to x', it is seen that there exists x" e A such that
x"x' = 1. Then x" = x" . 1 = x"x'x = 1 .x = x, hence xx' = 1. Hence x' is the
inverse of x.

Remark. In Theorem 1 , left ideals may be replaced by right ideals. In Chapter
VIII, § 5, no. 2, we shall study non-zero rings A which have no two-sided
ideal distinct from and A; such rings (called quasi-simple) are not neces-
sarily fields *(for example, the ring M 2 (Q) of square matrices of order 2 with
rational coefficients is quasi-simple but is not a field) *.

Corollary 1. Let Abe a ring and a a two-sided ideal of A. For the ring A/a to be a
field, it is necessary and sufficient that a be a maximal left ideal of A.

The left ideals of A/a are of the form bja where b is a left ideal of A containing
a (§ 8, no. 8, Corollary to Proposition 5) . To say that A/a ^ means that
MA. Under this hypothesis, A/a is a field if and only if the only left ideals of A
containing a are a and A (Theorem 1), whence the corollary.

Corollary 2. Let A be a commutative ring which is not 0. There exists a homo-
morphism of A onto a commutative field.

By KrulPs Theorem (§ 8, no. 6, Theorem 1), there exists in A a maximal
ideal a. Then A/a is a field (Corollary 1).

Corollary 3. Let a be an integer ^ 0. For the ring Z/dZ to be afield, it is necessary
and sufficient that a be prime.

This follows from Corollary 1 and § 8, no. 1 1 .
For p prime the field Z//&gt;Z is denoted by F p .

Theorem 2. Let K be afield and A a non-zero ring. Iff is a homomorphism of K
into A, then the subringf(K) of A is afield and f defines an isomorphism ofK. ontof(K) .

Let a be the kernel of/. Then 1 &lt;£ a for/(l) = 1 ^ in A and, as a is a left
ideal of K, a = {0} by Theorem 1. Therefore /is injective and hence an iso-
morphism of K onto the subring/(K) of A; the latter ring is therefore a field.

115



ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES



2. INTEGRAL DOMAINS



Definition 2. A ring A is called an integral domain (or a domain of integrity) if it is
commutative, non-zero, and the product of two non-zero elements of A is non-zero.

The ring Z of rational integers is an integral domain; it is commutative and
non-zero; the product of two integers &gt;0 is non-zero; every non-zero integer
is of the form a or —a with a &gt; and ( — a)b = —ab, { — a)( — b) — ab for
a &gt; 0, b &gt; 0, whence our assertion.

Every commutative field is an integral domain. A subring of an integral
domain is an integral domain. In particular, a subring of a commutative field
is an integral domain. We shall show that conversely every integral domain A
is isomorphic to a subring of a commutative field. Recall (§8, no. 12) that
A has been identified with a subring of its total ring of fractions. Our assertion
then follows from the following proposition :

Proposition 2. If A is an integral domain, the total ring of fractions K of A is a
commutative ring.

The ring K is commutative. It is non-zero since A # {0}. As A is an integ-
ral domain, every non-zero element of A is cancellable and K consists of
the fractions a[b with b ^ 0. Now a/b ^ implies a ^ and the fraction b\a is
then inverse of a/b.

The total ring of fractions of an integral domain is called its field of fractions.
Such a ring is identified with its image in its field of fractions.

Proposition 3. Let IS be a non-zero ring and A a commutative subring ofB such that
every non-zero element of A is invertible in B.

(a) A is an integral domain.

(b) Let A' be the field of fractions A. The canonical injection of A into B can be
extended uniquely to an isomorphism f of A' onto a subfield ofB.

(c) The elements off (A') are the xy~ x where xeA,yeA,y ^ 0.

Assertion (a) is obvious. The canonical injection of A into B extends uniquely
to a homomorphismjTof A' into B (§ 8, no. 12, Theorem 5). Assertion (b) then
follows from no. 1, Theorem 2. The elements of A' are the fractions x\y with
xeA, y eA, y ^ and f{xjy) = xy' 1 , whence (c).

3. PRIME IDEALS

Proposition 4. Let A be a commutative ring and p an ideal of A. The following
conditions are equivalent:

(a) the ring A/p is an integral domain;

(b) A ^ p and, if x sA-p andy e A — p, then xy e A — p.

(c) p is the kernel of a homomorphism of A into afield.

116



THE FIELD OF RATIONAL NUMBERS § 9.4

The implications (c) =&gt; (b) =&gt; (a) are obvious. If A/p is an integral domain,
let / be the canonical injection of A/p into its field of fractions and g the
canonical homomorphism of A onto A/p; then p is the kernel of/o g, whence
the implication (a) =&gt; (c).

Definition 3. In a commutative ring A, an ideal p satisfying the conditions of Proposi-
tion 4 is called a prime ideal.

Examples. (1) Let A be a commutative ring. If m is a maximal ideal of A, m is
prime; the ring A/m is a field (no. 1, Corollary 1 to Theorem 1).

(2) If A is an integral domain, the ideal {0} of A is prime (but not maximal
in general, as the example of the ring Z proves).

4. THE FIELD OF RATIONAL NUMBERS

Definition 4. The field of fractions of the ring Z of rational integers is called the field
of rational numbers and is denoted by Q,. The elements of Q are called rational numbers.

Every rational number is thus of the form ajb where a and b are rational
integers with b ^ (and we may even take b &gt; as the relation

alb = (-a)/(-b)

proves). Q,+ is used to denote the set of rational numbers of the form ajb with
a eN and b eN*.
We have the relations:

(l) Q. + + Q. + = Q. +

(2) o, + a + = a +

(3) q + n (-a + ) = {0}

(4) Q + u (-Q + ) = a

(5) ft + nZ = N.

The first two follow from the formulae a\b + a'jb' — (ab' + a'b)jbb',
{ajb) {a' fb') = aa'jbb', 0eQ,+ , 1 eQ,+ and the fact that N is stable under
addition and multiplication and N* under multiplication. Obviously e Q, + ,
whence 0e( — Q,+); let x be in Q, + n ( — Q,+); then there exist positive
integers a, b, a', b' with b # 0, b' =£ and x = ajb = —a'jb'', then
ab' + ba' = 0, whence ab' = (for ab' ^ and ba' ^ 0) and therefore a =
since b' ^ 0; in other words, x = 0. Finally, obviously N cz Z and N c: Q + .
Conversely, if a? belongs to Z n Q, + , it is a rational integer; there exist two
rational integers a and b with a ^ 0, b &gt; and x = alb, whence a = bx; if
x$N, then — x &gt; 0, whence —a = b(—x) &gt; and consequently a &lt;
contrary to the hypothesis.

Given two rational numbers x and y, we write x^yify — x e Q,+ . It is
easily deduced from formulae (1), (3) and (4) that x ^ y is a total ordering on

117



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Q,, from (5) that this relation induces the usual order relation on Z. Finally,
from (1) it follows that the relations x ^ y and x' &lt; y' imply x + x' &lt; y + y'
and from (2) that the relation x ^y implies xz &lt; yz for all z ^ and xz ^ yz
forz &lt; (cf. VI, §2, no. 1).

Let xbea rational number, x is said to be positive if x ^ 0, strictly positive if
x &gt; 0, negative if * ^ and .rtnc% negative if * &lt; O.f The set of positive rational
numbers is Q, + and that of negative numbers is — Q, + . If Q,* denotes the set of
non-zero rational numbers, the set Q?+ of strictly positive numbers is equal to
Q,* n Q,+ and — Q,* is the set of strictly negative numbers.

The sets Q,* and {1, —1} are subgroups of the multiplicative group Qf.
Every rational number x ^ can be expressed in one and only one way in the
form l.y, ( — l).y, where y &gt; 0; hence the multiplicative group Qf is the
product of the subgroups Q% and {1,-1}, the component of* in Q% is called
the absolute value of x and is denoted by |*| ; the component of * in {—1, 1}
(equal to 1 if x &gt; 0, to — 1 if* &lt; 0) is called the sign of a: and denoted by sgn x.

Usually these two functions are extended to the whole of Q,by setting |0| =
and sgn = 0.



§ 10. INVERSE AND DIRECT LIMITS

Throughout this paragraph, I will denote a non-empty preordered set, a &lt; (3
the preordering on I. The notion of inverse (resp. direct) system of sets relative
to the indexing set I is defined in Set Theory, III, § 7, no. 1 (resp. Set Theory,
III, § 7, no. 5, under the hypothesis that I is right directed).

1. INVERSE SYSTEMS OF MAGMAS

Definition 1. An inverse system qf magmas relative to the indexing set I is an inverse
system qf sets (E a ,/ aB ) relative to I, each E a having a magma structure and eachf^
being a magma homomorphism.

Let (E a ,/ aB ) be an inverse system of magmas whose laws are written multi-
plicatively. The inverse limit set E = lim E a is a subset of the product magma

1 1 E a consisting of the families (x a ) aeI such that # a =/ a0 (x B ) for a &lt; p. If

ael

(* B ) and (y B ) belong to E, then for a ^ (3, x a =/ a3 (* 3 ) andy a =/ aB (y B ), hence
«* =/«u(*B)/au(yB) =/au(*Byp) ', hence E is a submagma of l g l E a . E will be
given the law induced by that on 1 1 E a ; the magma obtained is called the



f We avoid the current terminology where positive means &gt; 0.
118



INVERSE LIMITS OF ACTIONS § 10.2

inverse limit magma of the magmas E a . It enjoys the following universal pro-
perty:

(a) For all a e I, the canonical mapping/ a of E into E a is a magma homo-
morphism of E into E a .f a = f a $ of$ for a &lt; (3.

(b) Suppose a magma F is given and homomorphisms u a : F -&gt; E a such that
w a = /03 ° M e f° r a &lt; p. There exists one and only one homomorphism
u: F -&gt; E such that u a =f a °u for all a e I (namely x i-&gt; u{x) = Kc(*))aei)-

If the magmas E a are associative (resp. commutative), so is E. Suppose that
each magma E a admits an identity element e a and that the homomorphisms
/ a|3 are unital. Then e = (&lt;?«) ae i belongs to E for &lt;? a = f^{e &amp; ) for a ^ p and it is
an identity element of the magma E; with the above notation, the homo-
morphisms f a are unital and if the u a are unital then u is unital. Further, an
element x = (x a ) asI of E is invertible if and only if each of the x x is invertible in
the corresponding magma E a and x' 1 = (^~ 1 ) &lt;xeI ; this follows from the

formula/aB^B -1 ) =/ a 3(*B) _1 = *a X for a &lt; P-

From these remarks it can be deduced that if the magmas E a are monoids
(resp. groups) and the ^3 are monoid homomorphisms, then the magma E is
a monoid (resp. a group). In this case we speak of an inverse system of monoids
(resp. groups). The universal property goes over immediately to this case.

It is left to the reader to define an inverse system of rings (E a ,/ a3 ) and to

verify that E = lim E a is a subring of the product ring 1 1 E a , called the

inverse limit ring of the rings E a ; it can be verified that the universal property
extends to this case.

Let @ = (E a ,/ aB ) and (£' = (E«,/ a ' ) be two inverse systems of magmas
(resp. monoids, groups, rings) relative to the same indexing set. A homo-
morphism of @ into @' is an inverse system (u a ) aeI of mappings w a : E a -»■ E«
such that each « a is a homomorphism. Under these conditions, the mapping
u = lim w a of lim E a into lim E„ is a homomorphism (cf. Set Theory , III,

§ 7, £T2). ^~ ^~

2. INVERSE LIMITS OF ACTIONS

Suppose there are given two inverse systems of sets (Cl a , fy^) and (E a ,/ a3 ) rela-
tive to the same indexing set I. Suppose there is given for all a e I an action of
Q a on E a such that

(1) f *»(&lt;*&amp;») = 4»«f»("B) -/a&amp;fa)

for a ^ j3, # 3 g E 3 , 6)3 e Q B . Then the family of actions considered is said to be
an inverse system of actions. Let Q. = lim Q a and E = lim E a ; if x = (# a ) aeI
belongs to E and &lt;o = (« a ) aeI belongs to Q, then w.# = (&lt;o a .# a ) aeI belongs

119



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

to E by (1). Thus an action of CI on E is defined called the inverse limit of the
actions of the £2 a on the E a .

The above applies especially in the case where the Q a are monoids and each
action of £2 a on E a is an operation. Then the inverse limit of these operations
is an operation of the monoid on E.

It is left to the reader to define the inverse limit of an inverse system of groups
with operators and to verify that this limit is a group with operators.

3. DIRECT SYSTEMS OF MAGMAS

In this no. and the following we shall assume that I is right directed.

Definition 2. A direct system of magmas relative to the indexing set I is a direct system
of sets (E a ,/ Ba ) relative to I, each E a having a magma structure and eachf eci being a
magma homomorphism.

Let (E a ,/ Ba ) be a direct system of magmas. E will denote the direct limit set
lim E a and f a the canonical mapping of E a into E. Recall that

( 2 ) f » fti U = f* for a &lt; (3,

( 3 ) E = U/ a (E a ).

CG6l* / x '

By (2), also

( 4 ) /«(E a ) c/ B (E B ) for a &lt; (3.

If *o»y a eE a are such that /«(*«) =/«(y«), there exists a p &gt; a such that

/fla(*a) =/pa(y«).

Proposition 1. There exists on E one and only one magma structure for which the
mappings / a : E a -» E are homomorphisms. If the magmas E a are associative (resp.
commutative), so is E. If the magmas E a and the homomorphism / Ba are unital, so are the
magma E and the homomorphisms f a .

The magmas E a will be written multiplicatively.

Let x, y be in E. There exist a in I and x w y a in E a such that x = f a (x a ) and
y =fx(y&lt;x)' If there exists a magma structure on E for which f a is a homo-
morphism, then x.y =f 0l (x a y 0t ), whence the uniqueness of this magma structure.

To prove the existence, we must prove that for a, (5 in I, x ai y a in E a and
x B , y B in E B , the relations

( 5 ) /«(*«) =/■(*», My«) =My'fi)

imply /«(* a y a ) =/ B (* B y B ). For y ^ a and y ^ (3, we set * Y =/ YOt (* a ),
120



DIRECT SYSTEMS OF MAGMAS § 10.3

y-i =fya(y«)&gt; x 'y = fyM) &gt; y\ = ftM)- B Y the definition of direct limit, there
exists y in I with y ^ a, y ^ p, x y = x' y , y y = y' y . Then

/«(*«y«) = /*(/*«(*«?«)) =fy(x y y y ) = f y (x y y' y ) = / y (/ yB (*^))

Suppose the magmas E a are associative. Let *, y, z be in E. There exist a e I
and elements # a , y a , z a in E a such that

* = /«(*«), y =/«(y«), z =/«(z«).
Then *y =/ B (* ot y B ), whence (*y)z = /«((*«#„) z«) ; similarly

*(y*0 =f*{**(y*z*))&gt;

whence (*y)z = *(yz) for (* a y a )z a = * a (y a z a ). The case of commutative
magmas is treated analogously.

Suppose finally that each magma E a has an identity element &lt;?« and that
/ea(«a) = *p for a &lt; P. For a, (3 in I, there exists y in I with y ^ a and y ^ (3,
whence

/«W =/*(/**(««)) =/vW =fy(fyM) =M^)

and there thus exists an element * in E such that/ a (* a ) = * for all a e I. Let #
be in E; choose a e I and * a g E a such that x =./«(*„)• Then

** = /a(*a)-/a(*oc) = /a(«a-*a) = /«(*«) = *

and similarly #.* = *, hence * is the identity element of E.

The magma E is called the direct limit of the magmas E a .

Proposition 2. Let (E a ,/ 3a ) 6* a ak'ratf system of magmas and let E be its direct limits
/a : E a -&gt;E the canonical homomorphisms. Suppose a magma F and homomorphisms
u &lt;x' E a -&gt; F «r* £*w» jmcA ffa* « a = w 3 of^for a &lt; p. 77zmr &lt;?xwfr o«* and only one
homomorphism u: E -&gt; F jwA /A&lt;tf w a = « °/ a /or a// a e I. Tfffc magmas E a awrf F
a«&lt;/ ^ homomorphisms fug, and « a are wm'ta/, the homomorphism u is unital.

We know (Set Theory, III, § 7, no. 6, Proposition 6) that there exists one and
only one mapping u: E -&gt; F such that w a = u °/ a for all a e I. We verify that
u is a homomorphism : let *, y be in E, a in I and x a , y a in E a such that x = / a (* a )
andy = f a (y a ). Then xy =/ a (x a y B ), whence

"(*y) = «(/a(*«y«)) = ««(*«y«) = ««(*«)««(y«)

= «(/«(«a))"(/a(ya)) = "(*)%)•

We consider now the unital case and let &lt;? a denote the identity element of E a ,
e that of E and e' that of F. Choose a e I, then e =/„(««), whence

"00 = «(/a(0) = ««('«) = «'
for M a is unital. Hence u is unital.

121



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

By analogy with the notion of direct system of magmas, that of a direct
system of monoids or groups can be formulated. Proposition 1 shows that the
magma E which is the limit of a direct system of monoids (E a ,/ Ba ) a&gt;BeI is a
monoid. We show that E is a group if the E a are groups : let x e E, a e I and
* a e E a be such that x = f a {x a ) ; the element y = f a (x~ x ) of E is the inverse of x
(§2, no. 3). The universal property of Proposition 2 goes over immediately
in the case of a direct system of monoids or groups.

The reader is left to define a direct system of rings. Let (A a ,/ Boe ) be such a
direct system; let A = lim A a and/ a : A a -&gt; A the canonical homomorphisms.
There exists (Proposition 2) on A one and only one addition and multiplica-
tion characterized by x + y =/«(*« + y«), xy =f K {x„tf a ) for ael, x a ,y a in A a
and x = f 0l (x a ), y =f a (y a )- Under addition A is a commutative group and
multiplication is associative and unital. Finally, for x, y, z in A, choose a in I
and x a , y a and z a in A a with

x =/«(*«), y =/«(y«) and z = /«(*«).
Then

(x+y).z =/«(*« + y«)/«(z«) =/«((*« + y«K)

= /a(^a2« +y a Z«) = /a(*«Z«) + MVa^) = XZ + yz

and the relation x(y + z) = xy + xz is proved analogously. In other words, A
has the structure of a ring, characterized by the fact that/ a is a ring homo-
morphism for all ael.

The ring A is called the direct limit of the rings A a . Proposition 2 extends
immediately to the case of rings.

Proposition 3. (a) If the A a are non-zero, A is non-zero.

(b) If the A a are integral domains, A is an integral domain.

(c) If the A a are fields, A is afield.

Let a , l a be the zero and unit of A a and 0, 1 the zero and unit of A. There
exists ael such that/ a (0 a ) = 0,/ a (l a ) = 1. If = 1, there exists (3 ^ a such
that/ Ba (0 a ) =/,j a (l a ), that is 0„ = V This proves (a).

Suppose that A a are integral domains. Then A is commutative and non-zero
by (a). Let x,y be elements of A such that xy = 0. There exists ael and
x a , y a eA a such that x =/«(*«), y =/«(y«). Then/^x^) = xy = =/ a (0 a ).
Hence there exists {J ^ a such that/ 3a (A: a 5r a ) =/ Ba (O oe ). As A 3 is an integral
domain, it follows that/ Pa (x a ) = B or/ Ba (y a ) = B , hence x = or y = 0.
This proves (b).

Suppose that the A a are fields. Then A ^ {0} by (a). Let a: be a non-zero
element of A. There exist ael and x a e A a such that x = f a (x K ). Then * a #
andf^x' 1 ) is the inverse of* in A. This proves (c).

Let &lt;£ = (E a ,/ Ba ) and &amp; = (E«,/ Ba ) be two direct systems of magmas
122



DIRECT LIMIT OF ACTIONS § 10.4

(resp. monoids, groups, rings). A homomorphism of @ into &lt;£' is a direct
system (« a ) a6l of mappings « a : E a -&gt; E£ such that each u n is a homomorphism.
Under these conditions, the mapping u = lim u a from E = lim E a to

E' = lim E« is a homomorphism (cf. Set Theory, III, § 7, no. 6).

4. DIRECT LIMIT OF ACTIONS

Suppose that there are given two direct systems of sets (Q a , (j&gt; 3a ) and (E a ,/ 0a )
relative to the same indexing set I and for each oc e I an action of £J a on E a .
Suppose that

/**(*&gt;« -*o) = &lt;fo»a(«a) -/fl«(*a)

for a ^ (3, w a e Q* and # a e E a . Then the family of actions under consideration
is said to be a direct system of actions. It is easily verified as in Proposition 2 that
there exists an action h of O = lim O a on E = lim E a which is described as

follows: let to e CI and x e E; choose a e I and o&gt; a e Q a , # a e E a such that
to = &lt;J&gt; a (&lt;o a ) and x =f x (x (x ) (&lt;j&gt; a : O a -&gt; D. a.ndf a : E a -&gt; E denote the canonical
mappings); then g&gt;.# =./i(c&gt;) a .^ a ). The action of Q on E is called the direct
limit of the actions of the £l a on the E a .

If the Q a are monoids and each action of Q a on E a is an operation, the direct
limit action is an operation.

It is left to the reader to define the direct limit of a direct system of groups
with operators and to verify that this limit is a group with operators.



123



EXERCISES



§1

1. Let E be a set, A &lt;= E x E and (x,y) i-&gt; x T y, (x,y) eA, an internal
law of composition not everywhere defined on E. Given two subsets X and Y
of E, let X T Y denote the set of elements of E of the form x T y with xeX,
y eY and (x, y) e A. A law of composition is thus defined which is everywhere
defined on *?P(E).

If (X a ) aeA and (Y B ) 36B are any two families of subsets of E, then

(UxJt(UyJ=, U (x a t y„).

VaeA °7 \0eB p / (a,0)eAxB v a py

2. Let T be a law of composition not everywhere defined on a set E. Let E'
be the subset of 93(E) consisting of the sets {x} where x runs through E and the
empty subset of E; show that E' is a stable _subset of 93(E) under the law
(X, Y) i-&gt; X T Y (Exercise 1) ; deduce that, if E denotes the set obtained by
adjoining (Set Theory, II, § 4, no. 8) to E an element &lt;o, the law T can be ex-
tended to E x E, so that the law T is identical with the law induced on E by
this extended law.

3. Let T be a law of composition not everywhere defined on E.

(a) For the law (X, Y) i-&gt; X T Y (Exercise 1) between subsets of E to be
associative, it is necessary and sufficient that, for all x e E, y e E, z e E, if one
of the two sides of the formula (x T y) T z = x T (y T z) is defined, so is the
other and is equal to it (use Exercise 1 to show that the condition is sufficient).

(b) If this condition holds, show that Theorem 1 of no. 3 can be
generalized as follows: if one of the two sides of formula (3) is defined, the other
is defined and is equal to it.

4. (a) Given a set E, let O be the set of mappings into E of any subset of E ;
if/, g, h are three elements of O, show that if the composition (fog) oh is
defined so isfo (g ° h), but that the converse is not true; if these two composi-
tions are defined they are equal.

124



EXERCISES

(b) Let 5 be a family of non-empty subsets of E such that no two have an
element in common and let T be the subset of O consisting of the bijective
mappings of a set of ft onto a set of 5- Show that, under the law induced by the
lawfog on Y, the condition of Exercise 3(a) holds.

5. Show that the only triples (m,n,p) of natural numbers ^0 such that
(m n ) p = m nP are: (1, n,p), n and/&gt; being arbitrary; (m, n, 1), m and n arbitrary
and {m, 2, 2) where m is arbitrary.

6. Let T be a law of composition on a set E; let A be the subset of E con-
sisting of the elements x such that x T (y T z) = (x T y) T z for ally e E, z e E ;
show that A is a stable subset of E and that the law induced on A by T is
associative.

7. If T is an associative law on E and a and b two elements of E, the sets
{a} T E, E T {b}, {a} T E T {b}, E T {a} T E are stable subsets of E under the
law T.

8. Let T be an associative law on E and a an element of E; for all x e E,
y g E, we write x±y = xTaTy: show that the law _L is associative.

9. On a set E the mappings (x, y) i-&gt; x and (x, y) *-&gt;y are opposite associative
laws of composition.

10. Let X and Y be any two subsets of a set E and let X T Y = X U Y if
XnY= 0,XTY = EifXnY^ 0; show that the law of composition
thus defined on ^(E) is associative and commutative.

1 1 . Let T be an associative law on E and A and B two subsets of E which are
stable under this law; show that, ifBTA cAtB, A T B is a stable subset
ofE.

12. The only distinct natural numbers ^0 which are permutable under the
law (x, y) i-&gt; x y are 2 and 4.

13. Show that under the law (X, Y)h-XoY between subsets of E x E the
centre is the set consisting of and the diagonal.

14. Show that under the law of composition fog between mappings of
E into E the centre consists of the identity mapping.

15. A law T on a set E is called idempotent if all the elements of E are idempo-
tent (no. 4) under this law, that is if x T x = x for all x g E. Show that, if a law
T on E is associative, commutative and idempotent, the relation x T y = y is
an order relation on E; if we write x ^ y, any two elements x, y of E admit a
least upper bound (under this order relation) equal to x T y. Obtain the con-
verse.

125



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

16. Let T be an associative and commutative law of composition on a set

n

E. Let n be an integer &gt; 0. The mapping x h-&gt; T x of E into E is a morphism.

§2

1. Let T be a law of composition on a set E. Denoting by F the sum set
(Set Theory, II, § 4, no. 8) of E and a set {e} consisting of a single element and
identifying E and {e} with the corresponding subsets of F, show that it is
possible in one and only one way to define on F a law of composition T which
induces on E the law T and under which e is identity element; if T is associa-
tive, the law T is associative. (F is said to be derived from E "by adjoining an
identity element".)

2. Let T be a law everywhere defined on E.

(a) For T to be associative, it is necessary and sufficient that every left
translation y x be permutable with every right translation S y in the set of
mappings of E into E (with the lawfog).

(b) Suppose that E has an identity element. For T to be associative and
commutative, it is necessary and sufficient that the mapping (x,y) ^-^Tybea
morphism of the magma E x E into the magma E.

3. In the set F of mappings of E into E, for the relation/ o g = /o h to imply
g = h, it is necessary and sufficient that / be injective; for the relation
g of = ho/to imply g — h, it is necessary and sufficient that/ be surjective;
for/ to be cancellable (under the law o), it is necessary and sufficient that /be
bijective.

4. For there to exist on a set E a law of composition such that every permuta-
tion of E is an isomorphism of E onto itself under this law, it is necessary and
sufficient that E have 0, 1 or 3 elements.

5. For 2 &lt; n &lt; 5, determine on a set E with n elements all the laws every-
where defined admitting an identity element and under which all the elements
of E are cancellable; for n = 5 show that there exist non-associative laws satis-
fying these conditions.

(N.B. Exercises 6 to 17 inclusive refer to associative laws written multipli-
catively; e denotes the identity when it exists, y a and 8 a the translations by
a e E; for every subset X of E we write Ya( x ) = «X» 8 a (X) = Xa.)

6. For an associative law on a finite set, every cancellable element is inver-
tible (use no. 3, Proposition 3) .

7. Given an associative law on a set E and an element # e E, let A be the set
of x n for n e N* ; if there is an identity element, let B be the set of x n for n e N;
if further x is invertible, let G be the set of x a for a e Z. Show that, if A (resp.

126



EXERCISES

B, C) is infinite, it is isomorphic (with the law induced by the given law on E)
to N* (resp. N, Z) with addition.

8. In the notation of Exercise 7, suppose A is finite; show that A contains
one and only one idempotent (§ 1, no. 4) (observe that if x p and x q are
idempotentSj then x p = # p(3! , x 9 = # pa , hence x p = x 9 ) ; if h = x p , the set of x n for
n ^ /&gt; is a stable subset D of E such that under the law induced on D, D is a
group.

9. Under a multiplicative law on a set E let a be a left cancellable element of
E.

(a) If there exists an element u such that au = a, show that ux = x for all
x e E; in particular, if xu = x for all x e E, u is identity element.

(b) If there exist u e E such that au = a and ieE such that ab = u, show
that ba = « (form a£a) ; in particular, if there exists an identity element e and
an element b such that ab = e, b is the inverse of a.

10. If a and b are two elements of E such that ba is left cancellable, show that
a is left cancellable. Deduce that under an associative and commutative law
on E the set S of non-cancellable elements of E is such that ES &lt;= S (and in
particular is stable).

If 11. E is called a left semi-group if every element x of E is left cancellable.

(a) If u is an idempotent (§ 1, no. 4), then ux = x for all xeE (use
Exercise 9(a)) ; u is identity element for the law induced on Eu.

(b) If u and v are two distinct idempotents of E, then Eu r\Ev = and the
sets Eu and Ev (with the laws induced by that on E) are isomorphic.

(c) Let R be the complement of the union of the sets Eu, where u runs
through the set of idempotents of E. Show that ER &lt;= R; it follows that R is a
stable subset of E. If R is non-empty, then dR. ^ R for all a e R (use Exercise
9(a) to prove that, in the contrary case, R would contain an idempotent) ; in
particular, R is then infinite. R is called the residue of the left semi-group E.

(d) If R is non-empty and there exists at least one idempotent u in E (that
is E ^ R), for all xeKEu, xEu ^ Eu; in particular, no element of REm is
invertible in Eu and REm is an infinite set (use Exercise 8).

(e) If E has an identity element e, e is the only idempotent in E and R is
empty (note that E = Ee).

(f) If there exists a right cancellable element a in E (in particular if the
given law on E is commutative), either E has an identity element or E = R
(note that if there exists an idempotent u, then xa = xua for all x eE). For
example, if E is the set of integers ^ 1, with addition, E is a commutative semi-
group such that E = R.

(g) If there exists a g E such that 8 a is surjective, either E has an identity
element or E = R (examine separately the case where a e R and the case
where aeEu for an idempotent u).

127



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Tf 12. Under a multiplicative law on E, let a e E be such that y is surjective.

(a) Show that, if there exists u such that ua = a, then ux = x for all xeE.

(b) For an element b e E to be such that ba is left cancellable, it is necessary
and sufficient that y a be surjective and that b be left cancellable.

If 13. Suppose that, for all x e E, y x is surjective. Show that if, for an element
a g E, Ya is a bijective mapping, y x is a bijective mapping for all x e E (use
Exercise 12(b)); this holds in particular if there exist two elements a, b of E such
that ab = b (use Exercise 12(a)) ; E is then a left semi-group whose residue R
is empty; moreover, for every idempotent u, every element of Em is invertible
in Em.

^[ 14. For an associative law on a, finite set E there exist minimal subsets of the
form aE (that is minimal elements of the set of subsets of E of this form,
ordered by inclusion) .

(a) If M = aE is minimal, then xM = xE = M for all x e M; with the law
induced by that on E, M is a left semi-group (Exercise 1 1) in which every left
translation is bijective (cf. Exercise 13).

(b) If M = aE and M' = a'E are minimal and distinct, then M n M' = ;
for all b eM, the mapping x' &lt;-&gt;■ bx' of M' into M is a bijective mapping of M'
onto M. Deduce that there exist an idempotent u' e M' such that bu' = b and an
idempotent u e M such that uu' = u (take u to be the idempotent such that
bu = b). Show that u'u = u' (consider uu'u) and that every y' e M' such that
y'u = y' belongs to MV.

(c) Show that the mapping x' •-&gt; ux' of M V into M is an isomorphism of
MV onto Mu; deduce that M and M' are isomorphic left semi-groups.

(d) Let M { (1 ^ i ; ^ r) be the distinct minimal subsets of the form aE:
deduce from (b) that the idempotents of each left semi-group M { can be
arranged in a sequence (%) (1 &lt; j &lt; s) so that u Xj u kj = u {j for all i,j, k. If K
is the union of the M„ show that Eu tj &lt;= K (note that, for all x e E, xu Xj E is a
minimal subset of the form aE) ; deduce that E% is the union of the u ki Eu kj for
1 &lt; k &lt; r (show that (Eh w ) n M fe = u kJ Eu M ) and that Ew y E = K. Prove
finally that every minimal subset of the form Eb is identical with one of the s
sets Eu u (note, using (a), that Ebu {j b = Eb and deduce that Eb &lt;= K).

15. Let (xj) 1&lt;i&lt;n be a finite sequence of left cancellable elements.

(a) Show that the relation x x x 2 . . . x n = e implies all the relations
*i + i- • .x n x x x 2 . . .*i = e which are obtained from one another by "cyclic
permutation" for 1 &lt; i &lt; n.

(b) Deduce that if the composition of the sequence (x t ) is invertible each of
the x t is invertible.

If 16. Let T be an associative law on a set E and E* the set of cancellable
elements of E; suppose that E* is non-empty and that every cancellable

128



EXERCISES

element is a central element. Let 3= denote the set of subsets X of E with the
following property: there exists y e E* such that 5 y (E) c: X.

(a) Show that the intersection of two sets of 3= belong to ft.

(b) Let O be the set of functions/defined on a set of ^ taking their values in

-l
E and such that, for XeJ, / (X) belongs to $. Let R denote the relation
between elements/ and g of O : "there exists a set X e 5 such that the restric-
tions of/" and g to X are identical". Show that R is an equivalence relation; let
¥ = O/R be the quotient set of O under this relation.

(c) Let/ and g be two elements of O, A g g and Beg the sets where/ and
g are respectively defined; there exists X &lt;= B and belonging to 5 such that
g(X) &lt;= A; if gx is the restriction of g to X, show that the mapping f°g x
belongs to O and that its class (mod. R) depends only on the classes of/ and g
(and not on X) ; this class is called the composition of that of/ and that of g;
show that the law of composition thus defined on T is associative and has an
identity element.

(d) For all a e E, show that the left translation y belongs to O; let &lt;J&gt; be its
class (mod. R). Show that the mapping x i-&gt; § x is an isomorphism of E onto
a submonoid of T and that, if # e E*, § x is invertible in *F (consider the inverse
mapping of y X) show that it belongs to and that its class (mod. R) is the in-
verse of § x ). Deduce a generalization of Theorem 1 of no. 4.

17. Let E be a monoid and S a stable subset of E with the following proper-
ties:

(a) For all s e S and all a e E, there exist t e S and b e E such that sb = at.

(j3) For all a, b e E and all s e S such that sa = sb, there exist t e S such that
at = bt.

(a) In E x S let (a, s) ~ (b, t) denote the relation: "there exist s' and t' in
S such that tt' = ss' and as' = bt'." _

Show that ~ is an equivalence relation. We write E = E x S/~, denote by
as' 1 the equivalence class of (a, s) (mod ~) and by s: E -&gt; E the mapping
fl^-ar 1 . _

(b) Show that there exists on E one and only one monoid structure such
that e is a unital homomorphism and such that, for all s e S, e(s) is invertible.

(c) Show that (E, e) has the universal property described in Theorem 1
(no. 4).

(d) Show that s is infective if and only if the elements of S are cancellable.

§3

1. Let a •--&gt;/( be an action of Q, on E. Let F be the image of CI in E E and G
the stable subset of E E under the law (/, g) y-*f°g generated by F and the
identity mapping of E.

(a) Show that every subset of E which is stable under the action of Q is also

129



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

stable under the restriction to G of the canonical action of E E on E (no. 1,
Example 3).

(6) Let X be a subset of E; show that the stable subset of E generated by X
is the set of/(*) where/ runs through G and x runs through X.

2. Let X be an internal law on E which is doubly distributive with respect
to the associative internal law T ; show that, if x j_ x' andy ± y' are cancellable
under the law T, x _l_ y' is permutable with y L x' under the law T (calculate
the composition (x T y) JL (#' T y') in two different ways). In particular, if the
law ± has an identity element, two cancellable elements under the law T are
permutable under this law; if all the elements of E are cancellable under the
law T, this law is commutative.

3. Let T and ± be two internal laws on a set E such that J_ is right distribu-
tive with respect to T.

(a) If the law T has an identity element e, x ± e is idempotent under the
law T for all x e E; if further there exists y such that x ± y is cancellable under
the law T, then x ± e = e.

(b) If the law ± has an identity element u and there exists z e E which is
cancellable for both laws ± and T, u is cancellable under the law T.

^[ 4. Let T and j_ be two internal laws on E, each with an identity element;
if the left action of E on itself derived from each of the laws is distributive with
respect to the other, every element of E is idempotent under both these laws
(if e is the identity element for T, u the identity element for _L, prove first that
e _L e = e, noting that e = e ± (uT e)).

5. On a set E suppose three internal laws of composition are given : an
addition (not necessarily associative nor commutative), a multiplication (not
necessarily associative) and a law denoted by T. Suppose that the multiplica-
tion has an identity element e, that the law T is right distributive with respect
to multiplication and the law T is left distributive with respect to addition.
Show that, if there exist x, y, z such that x~T z, yT z and (x + y) T z are
cancellable under multiplication, then e + e = e (use Exercise 3(c)).

^f 6. An internal law of composition T on E is said to determine on E a
quasi-group structure if, for all x eE, the left and right translations y x and 8*
are bijective mappings of E onto itself. A quasi-group is said to be distributive if
the law T is doubly distributive with respect to itself.

(a) Determine all the distributive quasi-group structures on a set of n
elements for 2 ^ n &lt; 6.

(b) *Show that the set Q, of rational numbers, with the law of composition
(x,y) \-+ \ {x + y), is a distributive quasi-group. „.

(c) In a distributive quasi-group E, every element is idempotent. Deduce

130



EXERCISES

that, if E has more than one element, the law T can neither have an identity
element nor be associative.

(d) The right and left translations of a distributive quasi-group E are auto-
morphisms of E.

(e) If E is a finite distributive quasi-group, the structure induced on every
stable subset of E is a distributive quasi-group structure.

(/) Let E be a distributive quasi-group. If R is an equivalence relation
which is left (resp. right) compatible (no. 3) with the law T, the classes mod. R
are stable subsets of E. If E is finite, all these classes are obtained one from
another by left (resp. right) translation; under the same conditions, if R is
compatible with the law T, the quotient structure on E/R is a distributive
quasi-group structure.

(g) Let E be a distributive quasi-group. The set A a of elements of E which
are permutable with a given element a is stable; if E is finite, for all x e A a ,
A * = A o (note, using (e), that there exists yeA a such that x = aT y) and
when x runs through E the sets A* are identical with the equivalence classes
with respect to a relation compatible with the law T.

(h) If E is a finite distributive quasi-group and the law T is commutative,
the number of elements of E is odd (consider the ordered pairs (x, y) of elements
of E such that xjy=yTx = a, where a is given).

7. Suppose given on a set E an (associative and commutative) addition
under which all the elements of E are invertible and an (associative) multipli-
cation which is doubly distributive with respect to addition *(in other words,
a ring structure)*; write [x,y] = xy - yx; the law (x } y) h&gt; [ X) y] is doubly
distributive with respect to addition. For x and y to be permutable under
multiplication, it is necessary and sufficient that [x,y] = 0; and we have the
identities

[*,y] = -[y, *]; [*, [y, 2]] + [y, [z, *]] + [z, [*, y rj =

(the second is known as the "Jacobi identity"). The second identity may also
be written

[*&gt; [y&gt; Z J\ ~ [[*,?], A = [|&gt;, *],y]
which expresses the "deviation from associativity" of the law \x t y\.

8. With the same hypotheses as in Exercise 7, let x T y — xy + yx; then the
law T is commutative and doubly distributive with respect to addition but not
in general associative.

(a) For all x e E, show that "■?** = (t x) t (t x).

(b) If we write [x,y, z] = (x T y) T z - x T (y T z) (deviation from
associativity of the law T), prove the identities

[x,y,z] + [z,y,x] =

131



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

[x,y, z] + [y, z, x] + [z, x,y] =
[* T y, u, z] = [u, [(x T y), z)]]

(the notation [#, y] meaning the same as in Exercise 7)

[x T y, u, z] + [y T z, u, x] + [zT x, u, y] = 0.

^[ 9. Suppose given on E an (associative and commutative) addition under
which all the elements of E are invertible and a multiplication which is non-
associative, but commutative and doubly distributive with respect to addition.
Suppose further that n e Z, n #= and nx = imply x = in E. Show that if,
writing [x,y, z] = (xy)z — x(yz), the identity

[xy, u, z] + [yz, u, z] + [zx, u,y] =0

holds, then x m+n = x m x n for all x (show, by induction onp, that the identity
[x q ,y, x p ~ 9 ] = holds for 1 &lt; q &lt; p).

10. Let E be a commutative monoid whose law is written additively and
whose identity element is denoted by 0. Let T be an internal law on E which
is distributive with respect to addition and such that T x = x T = for all
*eE. Let S be a subset of E which is stable under addition and under each of
the external laws derived from T ; let E denote the monoid of differences of E
with respect to S under addition and s the canonical homomorphism of E into
E. Then there exists on E one and only one law T which is distributive with
respect to addition and such that s is a homomorphism for the laws T and T. If
the law T is associative (resp. commutative), so is the law T.



§4

1 . Determine all the group structures on a set of n elements for 2 ^ n ^ 6
(cf. §2, Exercise 5). Determine the subgroups and quotient groups of these
groups and also their Jordon-Holder series.

^[2. (a) An associative law (x, y) n&gt;^ona set E is a group law if there
exists e e E such that, for all x e E, ex = x and if, for all x e E, there exists x'
such that x'x = e (show that xx' — e by considering the composition x'xx';
deduce that e is the identity element).

(b) Show that the same is true if, for all «eE, the left translation y x is a
mapping of E onto E and if there exists some asE such that the right translation
8 a is a mapping of E onto E.

3. In a group G every finite non-empty stable subset H is a subgroup of G
(cf. § 2, Exercise 6).

132



EXERCISES

4. Let A and B be two subgroups of a group G.

(a) Show that the least subgroup containing A and B (that is the subgroup
generated by A U B) is identical with the set of compositions of the sequences
(*i)i«i«2n + i of an (arbitrary) odd number of elements such that x ( eA for i
odd and # ( e B for i even.

(b) For AB to be a subgroup of G (in which case it is the subgroup generated
by A U B), it is necessary and sufficient that A and B be permutable, that is
that AB = BA.

(c) If A and B are permutable and G is a subgroup containing A, A is
permutable with BfiG and A(B n C) =Cn (AB).

5. If a subgroup of a group G has index 2 it is normal in G.

6. Let (G a ) be a family of normal subgroups of a group G such that
D G a = {e}; show that G is isomorphic to a subgroup of the product group

n (G/G a ).

7. If G is the direct product of two subgroups A and B and H is a subgroup
of G such that A &lt;=■ H, H is the direct product of A and HnB.

8. Let A and A' be two groups and G a subgroup of A x A'. We write:

N = G n (A x {«}), H = pri (G)
N' = Gn ({e} x A'), H' = pr a (G).

(a) Show that N is normal in H and N' is normal in H' ; define isomorphisms

H/N -&gt; G/(N x N') -* H'/N\

(b) Suppose that H = A, H' = A', that the groups A and A' are of finite
length and that no quotient of a Jordan-Holder series of A is isomorphic to a
quotient of a Jordan-Holder series of A'. Show that G = A x A'.

9. Let G be a group which does not consist only of the identity element.
Suppose that there exists a finite subset S of G such that G is generated by S
(resp. by the elements gsg' 1 , g e G, s e S). Let 9t be the set of subgroups of G
(resp. of normal subgroups of G) distinct from G. Show that 9t, ordered by
inclusion, is inductive. Deduce the existence of a normal subgroup H of G such
that G/H is simple.

10. Let H be a normal subgroup of a group G contained in the centre of G.
Show that if G/H is a monogenous group G is commutative.

1 1 . If all the elements of a group G other than the identity element are of
order 2, G is commutative; if G is finite, its order n is a power of 2 (argue by
induction on n).

133



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

12. Let G be a group such that, for a fixed integer n &gt; 1, (xy) n = x n y n for
all x g G, y e G. If G (n) denotes the set of * n , where x runs through G, and G (n)
the set of x e G such that x n = e, show that G (n) and G (n) are normal subgroups
of G; if G is finite, the order of G (n) is equal to the index of G (B) . Show that, for
all x,y in G, also a; 1- n y 1-n = (*y) 1-B and deduce that jc B_1 y B = yV" 1 ; con-
clude from this that the set of elements of G of the form # n(n-1) generates a
commutative subgroup of G.

13. Let G be a group. If S is a simple group, S is said to occur in G if there
exist two subgroups H, H' of G with H a normal subgroup of H' such that
H'/H is isomorphic to S. Let in(G) denote the set of isomorphism classes of
simple groups occurring in G.

(a) Show that in(G) = o G = {e}.

(b) If H is a subgroup of G, show that in(H) &lt;= in(G) ; if moreover H is
normal, then

in(G) = in(H)uin(G/H).

(c) Let G x and G 2 be two groups. Show the equivalence of the two following
properties:

(i) in(G0 n in(G 2 ) = ;

(ii) Every subgroup of Gj x G 2 is of the formH x x H 2 withH x c: Gj and
H 2 c G 2 .

(Use Exercise 8.)
♦When G x and G 2 are finite groups, show that (i) and (ii) are equivalent to :

(iii) Card(Gj) and Card(G 2 ) are relatively prime. #

14. Let G be a group and H a subgroup of G. Any subset T of G which
meets every left coset mod. H in one and only one point is called a representa-
tive system of the left cosets mod. H (cf. Set Theory, II, § 6, no. 2) ; this con-
dition is equivalent to the following:

The mapping (x, y) \-&gt; xy is a bijection of T x H onto G.

(a) Let T be such a representative system; for all g e G and all t e T, let
x(g, t) e T and y(g, t) e H be such that gt = x(g, t)y(g, t). Let S be a subset
of G generating G. Show that the elements y(g, t), g e S, teT generate H.
(If H' denotes the subgroup of H generated by these elements, show that
T.H' is stable under the y g , geS, hence also under the y g , geG, and deduce
that T.H' = G, whence H' = H.)

(b) Suppose that (G : H) is finite. Show that G can be generated by a finite
subset if and only if H can.

If 15. Let ^ be a set of stable subgroups of a group with operators G; $ is
said to satisfy the maximal condition (resp. minimal condition) if every subset
of ft, ordered by inclusion, has a maximal (resp. minimal) element.

134



EXERCISES

Suppose that the set of all stable subgroups of a group G satisfies the minimal
condition.

(a) Prove that there exists no stable subgroup of G isomorphic to G and
distinct from G (argue by reductio ad absurdum by showing that the hypothesis
would imply the existence of a strictly decreasing infinite sequence of stable
subgroups of G).

(b) The minimal elements of the set of normal stable subgroups of G not
consisting only of e are called minimal normal stable subgroups. Let 9R be a set
of minimal normal stable subgroups of G and S the smallest stable subgroup
of G containing all the subgroups belonging to 9K; show that S is the direct
product of a. finite number of minimal normal stable subgroups of G (let (M n )
be a sequence of minimal normal stable subgroups of G belonging to 321 and
such that M n + 1 is not contained in the stable subgroup generated by the
union of M b M 2 , . . ., M n ; let S te be the stable subgroup generated by the
union of the M n of index n ^ k; show that S fc + 1 = S fc after a certain rank and
therefore that (M n ) is a finite sequence; finally use no. 9, Proposition 15).

(c) If G is a group without operators, show that every minimal normal sub-
group M of G is the direct product of a finite number of simple groups isomor-
phic to one another (let N be a minimal normal subgroup o/M; show that M
is the smallest subgroup of G containing all the subgroups aNa~ 1 where a runs
through G, and then apply (b) to the group M).

16. If the set of stable subgroups of a group with operators G satisfies the
maximal and minimal conditions (Exercise 15), G has a Jordan-Holder series
(consider, for a subgroup H of G, a maximal element of the set of normal
stable subgroups of H distinct from H).

% 17. Let G be a group with operators; a composition series (G 4 ) of G is
called normal if all the G 4 are normal stable subgroups o/G; a normal series 2
is called principal if it is strictly decreasing and there exists no normal series
distinct from 2, finer than 2 and strictly decreasing.

(a) If (G t ) and (H,) are two normal series of G, show that there exist two
equivalent normal series finer respectively than (G ( ) and (FL) (apply Schreier's
Theorem by considering a suitable domain of operators for G). Give a second
proof of this proposition by "inserting" the subgroups Gy = G t n (G i + 1 H,)
and H' H = H y n (H y+1 G,) in the sequences (G f ) and (H y ) respectively.

(b) If G has a principal series, any two principal series of G are equivalent;
for every strictly decreasing normal series 2 there exists a principal series finer
than 2. Deduce that, for G to possess a principal series, it is necessary and
sufficient that the set of normal stable subgroups of G satisfy the maximal and
minimal conditions.

(c) If G is a group without operators and possesses a principal series and if
the set of subgroups of G satisfies the minimal condition, every quotient group

135



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Gj/G i + 1 is the direct product of a finite number of simple subgroups isomorphic
to one another (use Exercise 15).

Tf 18. (a) Let G be a group with operators generated by the union of a
family (Hi) ie i of simple normal stable subgroups of G. Show that there exists
a subset J of I such that G is the restricted sum of the family (Hj) ieJ (apply
Zorn's Lemma to the set of subsets K of I such that the subgroup generated by
the union of the H 4 for i e K is the restricted sum of this family).

(b) Let A be a normal stable subgroup of G. Show that there exists a subset
J A of I such that G is the restricted sum of A and the H, for i e J A . Deduce that
A is isomorphic to the restricted sum of a subfamily of the H f .

*[f 19. (a) Let G be a group such that every normal subgroup of G distinct
from G is contained in a direct factor of G distinct from G. Show that G is the
restricted sum of a family of simple subgroups. (Let K be the subgroup of G
generated by the union of all the simple subgroups of G. Suppose K # G; if
*gG-K, consider a normal subgroup M of G which is maximal amongst
those containing K and not containing x. If G = M' x S, where M' contains
M and S # {&lt;?}, show that x&lt;£M' and therefore M' = M; on the other hand,
if N is a normal subgroup of S, show that M x N = G and conclude that S is
simple, whence a contradiction. Conclude with the aid of Exercise 18.) Obtain
the converse (cf. Exercise 18).

(b) In order that there exist in a group G a family (N a ) of normal simple
subgroups such that the G/N a are simple and D N a = {e}, it is necessary and

sufficient that, for every normal subgroup N ^ {e} of G, there exist a normal
subgroup N' ^ G such that NN' = G. (To see that the condition is necessary,
consider an»eN distinct from e and an N a not containing x. To see that the
condition is sufficient, for all x # e in G, consider the normal subgroup N
generated by x and a normal subgroup N' # G such that NN' = G. Show that
if a normal subgroup M of G is maximal amongst the normal subgroups of G
containing N' and not containing x, it is maximal in the set of all normal sub-
groups t^G and deduce the conclusion.)

20. (a) Let G be a group, the direct product of two subgroups A and B. Let
C A be the centre of A and let N be a normal subgroup of G such that
N n A = {1}. Show that N c C A x B.

(b) Let (Sj) l6l be a finite family of non-commutative simple groups. Show

that every normal subgroup of 1 1 S t is equal to one of the partial products
lis, where J is a subset of I.

21. Let G be a group of finite length. Show the equivalence of the following
properties:

(a) G is a product of simple groups isomorphic to one another.

136



EXERCISES

(b) No subgroup of G distinct from {1} and G is stable under all the auto-
morphisms of G.

If 22. Let E be a quasi-group (§ 3, Exercise 6) written multiplicatively,
possessing an idempotent e and such that (xy)(zt) = (xz)(yt) for all x,y, z, t.
Let u(x) denote the element of E such that u(x)e = x and v(x) the element of E
such that ev{x) = x; show that the law of composition (x,y) *-+u(x)v(y) is a
commutative group law on E under which e is identity element, that the
mappings x i-&gt; xe and y *-&gt;ey are permutable endomorphisms of this group
structure and that xy = u(xe)v(ey) (start by establishing the identities
e(xy) = (ex)(ey), (xy)e = (xe){ye), e(xe) = (ex)e; then note that the relations
x = y, ex = ey and xe = ye are equivalent). Obtain the converse.

f 23. Consider on a set E an internal law, not everywhere defined, written
multiplicatively and satisfying the following conditions :

(1) if one of the compositions (xy)z, x(yz) is defined, so is the other and they
are equal;

(2) if #, x', y are such that xy and x'y (resp. yx and yx') are defined and equal,
then x = x' ;

(3) for all x e E, there exist three elements e x , e' x and x~ x such that e„x = x,
xe' x = x, x~ x x = e' x ;e x i&amp; called the left unit of #, e' x the right unit of x, x' 1 the
inverse of x (by an abuse of language).

(a) Show that the compositions xx' 1 , x~ 1 e Xi e^x' 1 , e x e x , e' x e x are defined
and that xx' 1 = e x , x~ 1 e x = e' x x~ x = x~\ e x e x = e x , e' x e x = e' x .

(b) Every idempotent e of E (§ 1, no. 4) is a left unit for all the x such that ex
is defined and right unit for all the y such that ye is defined.

(c) For the composition xy to be defined, it is necessary and sufficient that
the right unit of x be the same as the left unit ofy (to see that the condition is
sufficient, use the relation e y = yy' 1 ); if xy = z, then x~ x z = y, zy' 1 = x,
y -1 * -1 = z _1 , z~ 1 x = y~ 1 ,yz~ 1 = x' 1 (the compositions appearing on the
left-hand sides of these relations being defined) .

(d) For any two idempotents e, e' of E, let G e&gt; e , denote the set of x e E such
that e is left unit and e' is right unit of x. Show that, if G e&gt; e is non-empty, it is a
group under the law induced by that on E.

E is called a groupoid if it also satisfies the following condition:

(4) for all idempotents e, e', G e&gt; e . is non-empty.

(e) In a groupoid E, if a e G e&gt; e &gt;, show that x h-&gt; xa is a bijective mapping of
G e&gt; e onto G e&gt; e -, y •-&gt; ay a bijective mapping of G e , t e . onto G e&gt; e , and x h+ a " x xa
an isomorphism of the group G e&gt;e onto the group G e - e -.

(/) Show that the law defined in § 1, Exercise 4(b) determines a groupoid
structure on the set T, if all the sets of the family 5 are equipotent.

24. (a) Given any set E, consider in the set E x E the law of composition,
not everywhere defined, written multiplicatively, under which the composition

137



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

of (x, y) and (y' t z) is only defined ify' = y and in this case has the value (x, z).
Show that E x E, with this law of composition, is a groupoid (Exercise 23).

(b) Let (x, y) = (*', y') (R) be an equivalence relation compatible with the
above composition (that is such that (x,y) = (x',y') and (y, z) = {y\ z')
imply (x, z) = {x',z')); suppose further that the relation R satisfies the
following condition: for all x, y, z there exists one and only one t e E such that
(x,y) = (z, t) and there exists a«eE such that (x,y) = (u, z).

Show that under these conditions the quotient structure by R of the groupoid
structure on E x E is a group structure (prove first that the quotient law is
everywhere defined, since, if x, y, z are three classes such that xy — xz, then
y = z; establish finally that, for all x e E, y e E, (x, x) = (y,y)).

(c) Let G be the group obtained by giving the quotient of E x E by R the
above structure. Let a be any element of E; if, for all x 6 E,/ a (x) denotes the
class mod. R of (a, x), show that/ a is a bijective mapping of E onto G and that
the relation (x,y) = (x',y') is equivalent to the relation

For G to be commutative, it is necessary and sufficient that the relation

(x,y) = {x\y') imply (x, x') = (y,y').

*If 25. Let E be a set and /a mapping of E m into E; we write
J (x l9 x 23 • • • j x m ) = x x x 2 . • • x m ;
suppose that/ satisfies the following conditions:

(1) (XiX 2 . . .X m )x m + 1 . . .X 2to _! = X 1 (x 2 X 3 . . .X m + 1 )X m + 2 . . .X 2m _!

identically;

(2) For all a u a 2 ,...,a m . x , the mappings

x h&gt; xa 1 a 2 . . . o m _ !
x i-&gt;- a x a 2 . . . a m _ x x

are bijections of E onto E.

(a) Show that identically

(X]X 2 . . •X m )x m + 1 - • -X 2m _i = XiX 2 . . .Xi(x i + 1 . . .x J + m )x i + m + 1 . . .x 2m _ x

for every index i such that 1 &lt; i ^ m — 1 (argue by induction on i, by con-
sidering the element

((x x x 2 . . .x m )x m + 1 . . .x 2m -i)tfia 2 - • -flm-i)-

(b) For all a lt a 2 ,...,a m . 2 , there exists u e E such that for all x

x = xa 1 a 2 . . .fl m _ 2 w = ua x a 2 . . .a m _ 2 x.

138



EXERCISES

(c) In the set E k of sequences (u lt u 2 ,..., u k ) of k elements of E
(I ^ k ^ m — 1) consider the equivalence relation R fc which states: for all
*i&gt; x 2, • • ■&gt; x m - k , u x u 2 . . .Mfc*^. . .x m _ k = VjV a . . .0*XiX a - • -Xm-k', let E fc denote
the quotient set E fc /R fc and G the sum set (Set Theory, II, §4, no. 8) of
E x = E, E 2 , . . ., E m _!. Let a e E i3 p g E y ; if (« 1} k 2 , . . ., «,) is a sequence of
class a, (»!,..., » y ) a sequence of class (3, consider the sequence

(«!, U 2 , ...,11,, ©J,..., Oy)

in E &lt;+y if* + j &lt; m, the sequence

(lli, K 2 , • • •, «» + &gt;-»» ("t + i-m + 1- • .Ufll*&gt;a- • -ty))

in E i+i-m + 1 ift +j ^ m; show that the class of this sequence in E J+y (resp.
E i+/ _ m + 1 ) depends only on the classes a and (3; it is denoted by a. p. Show that
a group law is thus denned on G, that H = E OT _! is a normal subgroup of G
and that the quotient group G/H is cyclic of order m — 1 ; prove finally that E
is identical with a class (mod. H) which generates G/H and that x x x 2 . . . x m is
just the composition, in the group G, of the sequence (x x , x 2 , . . ., x m ).

% 26. Let G, G' be two groups, /: G -&gt; G' a mapping such that, for two
arbitrary elements x,y of G,f(xy) =f(x)f(y) or f(xy) = f{y)f{x). It is pro-
posed to prove that /is a homomorphism of G into G' or a homomorphism
of G into the opposite group G'° (in other words, either/(*y) = f(x)f(y) for

every ordered pair (x,y) or f(xy) = f(y)f(x) for every ordered pair (x,y)).

-l

(a) Show that the set N = / («') (e' the identity element of G') is a normal

subgroup of G and that /factors into G A- G/N -4 G', where g is injective.
Attention may therefore be confined to the case where/ is injective, which will
be assumed throughout what follows.

(b) Show that if xy = yx then f(x)f(y) =f(y)f(x) (consider f(x 2 y) and
f{x 2 y 2 ), expressing them in several ways).

(c) Show that if f(xy) =f(x)f(y) then f(yx) =f(y)f(x). (Show with the
aid of (b) that attention may be confined to the case where xy # yx.)

(d) Show that f{xyx) =f(x)f(y)f(x). (Use (a) or (b) according to whether
xy = yx or xy ^ yx; in the second case, consider/(* 2 y) and/(y* 2 ).)

(e) Let A be the set of x e G such that/(*y) =f(x)f(y) for allyeG and B
the set of x e G such that/(*y) =/(y)/(*) for a// yeG. Show that A ^ G,
B # G and A U B = G is an impossible situation. (By virtue of (b) there
would then exist x,y in A such that/(*y) =f{x)f(y) ^f(y)f{x) and a, z&gt; in
B such that/(tw) =/(»)/(«) ^f{u)f(v). Deduce from this a contradiction
by considering successively the two possibilities xu e A, xu e B; in the first case
consider f(xuv) and in the second fiyxu).)

The rest of the proof consists of proving that A U B # G is impossible,
arguing by reductio ad absurdum. If A U B ^ G, there exist a, b, c in G such that
fiflb) =f(a)f(b) *f(b)f(a) and f{ac) =f{c)f{a) *f(a)f(c).

139



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(/) Show tha.tf(c)f(a)f(b) = f{b)f{a)f{c). (Consider two cases according
to whether be # cb or be — cb. In the first case, consider/(£ac) ; in the second,
use (b) and (c) and consider f(abc),f(bca) andf(bac).)

(g) Consider /{abac) and obtain a contradiction.

§5

1 . In a finite group G, show that the number of conjugates (no. 4) of an
element aeGis equal to the index of the normalizer of a and is therefore a
divisor of the order of G.

*[f 2. *If G is a finite group of order n, the number of automorphisms of G
is ^. n loenllog2 (show that there exists a generating set {a u a 2 , . . ., a m } of G such
that a { does not belong to the subgroup generated by a 1} a 2) . . ., a i _ 1 for
2 ^ i ^ m; deduce that 2 m ^ n and that the number of automorphisms of G
is ^« m ).*

3. Let T be the group of automorphisms of a group G and A the group of
inner automorphisms of G; show that A is a normal subgroup of Y. For an
automorphism a of G to be permutable with all the inner automorphisms of G,
it is necessary and sufficient that, for all x e G, x~ 1 a(x) belong to the centre of
G; deduce that, if the centre of G is reduced to the identity element, so is the
centralizer of A in T.

Tf 4. (a) Let G be a non-commutative simple group, T the automorphism
group of G and A the group of inner automorphisms of G (isomorphic to G). If
s is an automorphism of the group T, show that s(A) = A (using Exercise 3
above and § 4, no. 9, Proposition 15, note that the intersection A n j(A) can-
not consist only of the identity element of T) .

(b) Show that the only automorphism of T leaving invariant each of the
elements of A is the identity element (use the fact that this automorphism
leaves invariant a and aaa"" 1 for all a e A and a e T and use Exercise 3).

(c) Let s be an automorphism of T, ^ the isomorphism x t-&gt; Int(#) of G onto
A, ip the inverse isomorphism and a the automorphism &lt;{/ o s o § of G; show that
the automorphism £ i-&gt; a~ 1 s(Z ) )a of T is the identity automorphism (use (b),
noting that, for all xeG, s(Int(x)) = Int(cr(#))). Deduce that every auto-
morphism of T is an inner automorphism.

5. Let G be a group.

(a) If H is a subgroup of G of finite index n, show that the intersection N of
the conjugates of H is of index a divisor of n ! (note that G/N is isomorphic to
a subgroup of &lt;S n ) .

(b) G is called residually finite, if the intersection of its subgroups of finite index
is {e}. Show that this is equivalent to saying that G is isomorphic to a subgroup
of a product of finite groups.

140



EXERCISES



(c) Suppose that G can be generated by a finite set. Show that, for every
integer n, the set P n of subgroups of G of index n is finite.

(d) Under the hypothesis of (c), consider an endomorphism/of G which is

surjective. Show that, for every integer n, the mapping Hh-/ (H) is a bijec-
tion of P n onto itself (observe that it is an injection). Deduce that the kernel of
/ is contained in every subgroup of G of finite index. In particular, if G is
residually finite, /is bijective.

6. Let H be a subgroup of finite index in a group G. Suppose that G is the
union of the conjugates of H. Show that H = G. (Reduce it to the case where
G is finite by means of Exercise 5. In the latter case, note that:

Gard(U o xHx- 1 ) ^ 1 + (Card(H) - l)Card(G/H).)

7. Let^ be a prime number.

(a) Show that n p = n (mod. p) for all neZ. (Reduce it to the case where n is
positive and argue by induction on n using the binomial formula.)

(b) Let x, y be two elements of a group G. Suppose that

yxy- 1 = x n , with neZ, and that x p = 1.

Show tha.ty p xy~ p = x n ; deduce that y p ~ x commutes with x.

(c) Let G be a group all of whose elements # 1 are of order p and are
conjugate to one another. Show that Card(G) is equal to 1 or 2. (Use {b) to
prove that G is commutative.)

8. Let A and B be subgroups of a finite group G, N A and N B the normalizers
of A and B, v A and v B the indices of N A and N B in G, r A the number of conju-
gates of A which contain B and r B the number of conjugates of B which contain
A; show that v A r B = v B r A .

f 9. Let G be a group of permutations of a finite set E; for all s e G, let
X(s) denote the cardinal of the set of fixed points of s.

(a) Show that Z^ x(j) = Nt, where N = Card(G) and t is the number o

orbits of G in E (evaluate in two ways the number of ordered pairs
(s, x) e G x E such that s(x) = x).

(b) Suppose that, for all a e E, the stabilizer H a of a is not reduced to e.
Show that, if x(s) is independent of s for s # e and is equal to an integer £,then

k &lt; t ^ 2k.

(Note that Card(E) &lt; Nk.)

In the particular case where k = 2, find the possible orders of the groups H a ;
show that, if t = 3, the order of H a cannot be &gt;3 for elements of two of the
three orbits unless N has one of the values 12, 24 or 60.

141



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(c) Suppose that G operates transitively on E and let H denote the stabilizer
of an element of E; show that Z, xOO 2 1S equal to N. t H , where t R is the number

seG

of orbits of H in E. (For every (s, u), write xC*, u) = xOO- Evaluate in two ways
the sum 2* y(s, u), where R is the set of ordered pairs (s, u) such that
usu- 1 eU.)

10. (a) Show that the elements t 12 t 34 , t 13 t 24 , t 14 t 23 of the alternating
group 2l 4 form with the identity element a commutative subgroup H of 2( 4 .
Show that H is normal in 2l 4 and in €&gt; 4 and that 2l 4 /H is cyclic of order 3.

(b) Show that the centralizer of H in &lt;S 4 is equal to H. Deduce that the
mapping s *-*■ (h&gt;-+ shs' 1 ) of &lt;S 4 into Aut(H) defines when passing to the quo-
tient an isomorphism of &lt;S 4 /H onto Aut(H) and that the latter group is iso-
morphic to © 3 .

(c) Let K be a subgroup of H of order 2. Show that K is not normal in 2l 4 .

1 1 . Let E be a finite set, £ e 6 E a cycle of support E and t a transposition.
Show that €&gt; E is generated by £ and t.

f 12. (a) Show that every permutation a e 2l n is a product of cycles of
order 3 (which are not in general component cycles of a). (Prove it for a
product of two transpositions and use § 5, no. 7, Proposition 9.)

(b) If a lt . . ., a v are p distinct elements of (1, n), let {a 1 a 2 . . .a p ) denote the
cycle of order p whose support is {a ly a 2 , . . . , a p } and which maps a t to a i+1 for
1 ^ i ^ p— 1 and a p to a x . Show that 2t n is generated by the n — 2 cycles
(12 3),(12 4),...,(12n).(Use(«).)

(c) Deduce that, if n is odd, 2l n is generated by (1 2 3) and (1 2 ... n) and,
if n is even, by (1 2 3) and (2 3 . . . n).

(d) Show that, if a normal subgroup of 2l n contains a cycle of order 3, it is
identical with 2l n (prove that such a subgroup contains all the cycles (1 2 A;),
3 ^ k ^ n).

If 13. Let G be a transitive group of permutations of a set X and H the
stabilizer of an element x e'K. Show the equivalence of the following proper-
ties:

(a) Every subgroup H' of G containing H is equal to H or G.

(b) Every subset Y of X such that, for all g e G, gY is either contained in Y
or disjoint from Y, is equal to X or consists of a single element.

(If H' satisfies (a) and Y = H'*, then ^Y = Y for all g e H' and
gY nY= for all g $ H'. Conversely, if Y enjoys the property in (b), the set
H' of g £ G such that ^Y = Y is a subgroup of G containing H.)

A transitive permutation group G satisfying (a) and (b) and not consisting
only of the identity element is called primitive.

142



EXERCISES

14. A group of permutations T of a set E is called r-ply transitive if, for any
two sequences (a lt a 2 , . . ., a T ), (b lt b 2i ..., b r ) of r distinct elements of E, there
exists a permutation &lt;j e V such that a(a t ) = b x for 1 ^ i ^ r, this property not
holding for at least one ordered pair of sequences of r + 1 distinct elements of E.

(a) Show that an r-ply transitive group is primitive if r &gt; 1 .

(b) The order of a permutation group T operating on n objects which is r-ply
transitive is of the form n(n — 1) . . . (n — r + \)d, where d is a divisor of
(n — r)\ (consider a subgroup of the permutations of T leaving invariant r
elements and calculate its index).

^f 15. Let r be an r-ply transitive group of permutations of a set E with n
elements; for a permutation a e Y distinct from the identity permutation, let
n — s be the number of elements of E invariant under a. If s &gt; r, show that
there exists a permutation x e T such that cr" 1 Tax" 1 is distinct from the identity
permutation and the number of elements of E it leaves invariant is
^n — 2(s — r + 1) (use the decomposition of a into its component cycles).
If s = r, show similarly that there exists t g T such that ct^tctt" 1 is a cycle of
order 3. Deduce that, if r ^ 3 and F does not contain the alternating group Sl n ,
then s ^ 2r — 2 for every permutation in V (use Exercise 10). Conclude finally
that, if T is not identical with 2l n or &lt;S n , then r ^ n/3 + 1.

^ 16. (a) Show that the alternating group St n is (n — 2) -ply transitive.

(b) Show that 2t n is a non-commutative simple group for n ^ 5. (Use (a),
the method of Exercise 15 and Exercise 12(d) to prove that 2l n is simple if
n &gt; 6; examine analogously the cases n = 5 and w = 6.)

(c) Show that, for n ^ 5, the only normal subgroups of €5 n are {e}, 2l n and 6 n .

17. Let G be a transitive group of permutations of a set X; suppose G is
primitive (Exercise 13). Show that every normal subgroup of G distinct from
{e} is transitive.

18. Let T be a group of permutations of a set E. Let A and B be two subsets
of E, complements one of the other and stable under I\ Let T A and T B denote
the groups consisting of the restrictions of the permutations in T to A and B
respectively and A A and A B the subgroups of T which leave invariant respec-
tively every element of A and every element of B. Show that A A and A B are
normal subgroups of T and that T A is isomorphic to T/A A and T B to T/A B ; if
A AB (resp. A BA ) is the group consisting of the restrictions of the permutations in
A A (resp. A B ) to B (resp. A), show that the quotient groups T A /A BA , r B /A AB
and T/(A A A B ) are isomorphic (use Exercise 8).

19. Let G be a group, H a subgroup of G and G/H the set of left cosets
(mod. H) in G. Let r: G/H -^-Gbea section associated with the canonical
projection G -^ G/H. Then for all X e G/H, X = r(X) .H. An internal law
of composition is defined on G/H by setting X T Y = r(X)r(Y) .H.

143



ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES



(a) Show that X T H = X for all X and that under the law T every left
translation is bijective. If G' is the subgroup of G generated by the set of
elements r(X) and H'=Hn G', the internal law denned analogously on
G'/H' by the mapping r determines on this set a structure isomorphic to that
determined on G/H by the law T.

(b) For the law T to be associative, it is necessary and sufficient that H' be
a normal subgroup of G' in which case the structure determined by T is iso-
morphic to the structure of the quotient group G'/H' (to see that the condition
is sufficient, show first, with the aid of § 4, Exercise 2(a), that if T is associative
it determines on G/H a group structure; denoting by K the largest normal sub-
group of G' contained in H', show then, using the associativity condition on T,
that (r(XT Y))-V(X)r(Y)GK for all X,Y; deduce that the mapping
Xh&gt;r(X) .K is an isomorphism of the group G/H (with the law T) onto the
quotient group G'/K; conclude that H' = K, noting that H' is a union of
cosets mod. K).

(c) Conversely, suppose given on a set E an internal law of composition T
such that every left translation is bijective and there exists eeE such that
x T e = x for all x e E. Let T be the group of permutations of E generated by
the left translations y x and A the subgroup of permutations in T leaving e
invariant; show that to every left coset X modulo A there corresponds one and
only one element x e E such that y x e X; if we write r(X) = y x , the mapping
x ^ y x is an isomorphism of the set E with the law T onto the set T/A with the
law(X,Y)^r(X)r(Y).A.

20. Let G be a simple group and H a subgroup of G of finite index n &gt; 1.
(a) Show that G is finite and that its order divides n\ (use Exercise 5).

{b) Show that G is commutative if n ^ 4 (use Exercise 10).

21. Let p(n) be the number of conjugacy classes of the symmetric group e n .
Show that pin) is equal to the number of families (x lt . . ., x n ) of integers $s0

n

such that 2* i.x t — n.



"Deduce the identity 2 p(n)T n = 1 1 y

/ n = m = l 1



22. Let A = Z/2Z, B = &lt;£ 3 and G = A x B. If s is an element of B of order
2, let &lt;j&gt; be the endomorphism of G whose kernel is equal to B and whose image
is {1, s}. Show that the centre of G is not stable under §.

If 23. (a) Let s be an element of order 2 in the group &lt;S n which is a product
of k transpositions t^...,^ with mutually disjoint supports. Show that the
centralizer C s of s in &lt;S n is isomorphic to e n - 2 k x A, where A admits a normal
subgroup of order 2 fc such that A/B is isomorphic to e k (observe that every
element of C s permutes the fixed points of s and also the supports of t u . . . , t k ).

144



EXERCISES



(b) Show that, if n = 5 or n ^ 7, every element of order 2 in © n whose
centralizer is isomorphic to that of a transposition is a transposition (compare
the Jordan-Holder quotients of these centralizers using Exercise 16). Deduce
that every automorphism of &amp; n permutes the transpositions.

(c) If a, b are distinct elements of (1, »), let F a (resp. F ab ) denote the stabi-
lizer of a (resp. the fixer of {a, b}) in &lt;S n and (a b) the transposition T 0#b . Let
a, b, c, d be distinct elements of (1, n). Show that, if n ^ 5, the group generated
by F ab and F cd is &lt;S n (show that this group contains all the transpositions; for
this use the fact that, if x e (1, n) — {a, b, c. d}, then (ac) = (c x)(ax)(c x)).
Show that the group generated by F ab and F ac is F a (use the same equation as
in the above case).

(d) Show that an automorphism a of &lt;S n such that &lt;x(F a ) = F a for all
a e (1, n) is the identity (show that a maps every transposition to itself). Show
that, if there exists ae(l,n) such that a(F ) = F a , a is an inner automorphism
(show that there exists an inner automorphism (3 such that (3 o a maps each of
the groups F b , b e (1, n), to itself).

(e) Let a, b be two distinct elements of (1, n) and let C ab be the centralizer
of (a, b) in &lt;S n . Show that, if n ^ 5, the derived group of C ab is of index 4 in
C ab (use the fact that the derived group of @ n _ 2 is 2t n _ 2 ). Show that F ab is the
unique subgroup of C ob of index 2 which does not contain (a b) and is not
contained in 2l n .

(/) Show that, if n ^ 5, an automorphism a of n which leaves fixed a
transposition (a b) is inner. (Show by means of (e) that a(F ab ) = F ob ; show
equally that, if c $ {a, b}, a(F ac ) is either of the form F ax) x $ {a, b), or of the
form F bJC , x $ {a, b}; in the first case conclude that &lt;x(F a ) = F a and apply (d) ;
reduce the second case to the first by multiplying a by the inner automorphism
of 6 n defined by (a b).)

{g) Deduce from (b) and (/) that every automorphism of 6 n is inner if
n = 5 or n ^ 7.

24. (a) Show that there exists a subgroup H of © e which is isomorphic to
6 5 and leaves fixed no element of ( 1 , 6) (let &lt;S 5 operate by inner automorphisms
on the set of its subgroups of order 5, which has 6 elements).

(b) Show that there exists an automorphism a of &lt;S 6 which maps (12) to
(1 2) (3 4) (5 6). (Let 6 operate on 6 6 /H, where H is chosen as above.)

(c) Show that the group of inner automorphisms of 6 6 is of index 2 in the
group of all automorphism of 6 e . (Let a be an automorphism of &lt;S 6 ; show that
a maps a transposition either to a transposition or to a conjugate of
(1 2) (3 4) (5 6). Using Exercise 23, show that in the first (resp. second) case a
(resp. a o ct) is an inner automorphism.)

25. Let n be an integer ^ 5. Show that the subgroups of @ n of order (n - 1) !
are isomorphic to 6 n _ x and form a single conjugacy class (resp. two conjugacy
classes) if n # 6 (resp. if n = 6). (Let H be such a subgroup and x lt . . . , x n the

145



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

elements of €&gt; n /H. Show that the action of @ n on the x t defines an automorphism
of @ n and apply Exercises 23 and 24.)

Tf 26. (a) Let G be a group operating on two finite sets E x and E 2 . If s e G,
let Ji (resp. s 2 ) denote the permutation of E x (resp. E 2 ) defined by s and Ef
(resp. E 2 ) the set of elements invariant under s x (resp. s 2 ).

Show the equivalence of the following properties:

(i) For all s e G, Card(El) = Card(E s 2 ).

(ii) For all seG, the orders of the component cycles of s x (cf. no. 7, Propo-
sition 7) are the same (to within a permutation) as those of s 2 .

(iii) For all seG, there exists a bijection f s : E x -&gt; E 2 such that

If these properties hold, the G-sets E x and E 2 are said to be weakly equiva-
lent.

(b) Give an example of two weakly equivalent G-sets which are not iso-
morphic (take G to be a non-cyclic group of order 4).

(c) Let H x and H 2 be two subgroups of a finite group G. Show the equiva-
lence of the following properties:

(1) For every conjugacy class C of G,

Card(C n HO = Card(C n H a ).

(2) The G-sets G/Hx and G/H 2 are weakly equivalent.

(d) Show that, if Hj and H 2 satisfy properties (1) and (2) above and H x is
normal in G, then H 2 = H x .

(e) Let G = 2l 6 and let

H 1 = {*,(12)(3 4),(13)(2 4),(14)(2 3)}

H 2 = {*,(12)(3 4),(12)(5 6),(3 4)(5 6)}.

Show that H x and H 2 satisfy properties (1) and (2) and that Hj and H 2 are
not conjugate in 2l 6 (nor in © 6 ).

27. Let Y be a subset of a set X and let A be the fixer of Y in the permutation
group &lt;S X of X. Let M be the submonoid of @ x consisting of the elements s such
that sAs' 1 &lt;= A. Show that M is a subgroup of €&gt; x if and only if one of the sets
Y and X — Y is finite.

28. Let G be a group, A and B two subgroups of G and (J&gt; an isomorphism of
A onto B. Show that there exists a group G x containing G such that &lt;j&gt; is the
restriction of an inner automorphism of G x (use the permutation group of the
set G). Show that, if G is finite, G x can be chosen to be finite.

29. Let X be an infinite set. Let G be the subgroup of &lt;S X consisting of the
permutations a which enjoy the following property: there exists a finite subset
Y a of X such that ax = x if x e X — Y„ and the restriction of a to Y a is even.

146



EXERCISES



(a) Show that G is a non-commutative simple group. Show that every subset
of G which generates G is equipotent to X.

(b) Show that every finite group is isomorphic to a subgroup of G (use the
fact that 6 n is isomorphic to a subgroup of 2l n + 2 ).

§6

1. Let G be a group and H a normal subgroup of G such that G/H is cyclic
of finite order n. Let x be an element of G whose image x in G/H generates
G/H. Let &lt;j&gt; be the automorphism h •-&gt; xhx~ x of H and let y = x n ; then jgH.
Show that §(y) = y and that (j&gt; n is the inner automorphism of H defined byy.

Let t be the operation of Z on H defined by (m, h) h&gt; § m (h) and let
E = H x t Z be the corresponding semi-direct product. Show that the element
(y- 1 , n) of E generates a central subgroup C: of E and that the quotient E/Cj,
is isomorphic to G.

2. Show that every central extension of Z is trivial.

3. Define extensions (cf. § 5, Exercise 10)

Z/2Z x Z/2Z -&gt; 3l 4 -&gt; %
Z/2Z x Z/2Z-&gt;6 4 -^&lt;S 3 .

Show that these extensions are non-trivial, that the first admits a section and
that the second does not.

If 4. (a) Let G be a finite group of order mn such that there exists a normal
subgroup H of G which is cyclic of order m, the quotient group G/H being
cyclic of order n. Show that G is generated by two elements a, b such that
a m _ ^ £n _ a r^ bai-i _ a s } wnere r and j- are two integers such that r(s — 1)
and s n - 1 are multiples of m (take a to be an element generating H, b an
element of a coset generating G/H; express the elements b h a k b~ h as powers
of a and apply this in particular to the cases h = n, k = 1 and h = 1, &amp; = r).

(A) *Conversely, let G(m, », r, j) be the group defined by the presentation

&lt;&lt;z, b; a m = e, b n = a r , fo£-i = a"},

where w and n are two integers ^ and r and ^ arbitrary integers (cf. § 7,
no. 6) ; show that, if m, r(s ~ 1) and s n - 1 are not all zero, G(i», «, r, j) is a
finite group of order qn, where 9 is the greatest common divisor of m, \r(s - 1) |
and I s n - 1 1 ; in this group, the subgroup H generated by a is a normal sub-
group of order q and G/H is a cyclic group of order n (prove that every element
of G(m, n, r, s) can be written in the form a x b y , where * and y are two integers
such that &lt; x &lt; q - 1, ^ y &lt; n - 1, and G(m, n, r, j) is isomorphic to

147



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

the group consisting of the ordered pairs (x, y) of integers subjected to the above
conditions, with law of composition

/ w , /x _ /(* + x ' sV &gt;y + y') ify + y' &lt; n - 1

V&gt;y)'{x,y) - \( x + x &gt; s v + T} y +y &gt; -n) ify+y'^n

the first coordinate of the right-hand side being a sum modulo q). Examine the
cases where m = r(s — 1) = s n — 1 = 0.

The group G(n, 2, 0, — 1) is called the dihedral group of order 2ra and is de-
noted by D n ; the group G(4, 2, 2, — 1) is a group of order 8 called the quatern-
ionic group and denoted by Q. Show that in Q every subgroup is normal and
that the intersection of the subgroups distinct from {e} is a subgroup distinct
from {&lt;?}. Prove that D 4 is not isomorphic to Q. #

5. Let F be a group whose centre is {e} and A its automorphism group. F is
identified with a subgroup of A by means of the homomorphism Int: F -&gt; A;
let T = A/F.

(a) Show that the extension F -&gt; A -&gt; T is trivial only if T = {e} (note that
the centralizer of F in A is {e}).

(b) Suppose that V = {&lt;?}. Show that every extension

of a group G by the group F is trivial.

6. Let I be a set; write F = Z,E = Z x (Z/2Z) J andG = Z/2Z x (Z/2Z) 1 .

(a) Define a non-trivial extension F -&gt; E -&gt; G.

(6) Show that, if I is infinite, E is isomorphic to F x G.

7. Let G and A be two groups, A being commutative. Let x be a homo-
morphism of G into the automorphism group Aut(A) of A; if g e G, a e A, we
write °a = t(g)(a).A crossed homomorphism of G into A is any mapping § : G -&gt;
A such that

Ugg') = Kg) + W),

the group A being written additively. The crossed homomorphisms of G into A
form a group under addition denoted by Z(G, A).

(a) If a 6 A, the mapping g k-&gt; 9 a — a is denoted by 8 a . Show that a h-». 6 a is
a homomorphism of A into Z(G, A). The kernel of is the subgroup of A
consisting of the elements invariant under G. The image of is denoted by
B(G,A).

(b) Let X = A x T G be the semi-direct product of G by A. If § is a mapping
of G into A, show that g i-&gt; (§(g), g) is a section of X if and only if § belongs
to Z(G, A). For the sections corresponding to $ ls &lt;j&gt; 2 e Z(G, A) to be conjugate
by an element of A, it is necessary and sufficient that § x = &lt;j&gt; 2 mod. B(G, A).

148



EXERCISES



(c) Let F -&gt; E -&gt; G be an extension of G by a group F whose centre is equal
to A. Suppose that, if y e E and x = p(y), then



i( x f)=y-i(f)-y- 1

for all/e A. If &lt;j&gt; e Z(G, A), let u^ be the mapping of E into E given by the
formula u^{y) = i{${p{y))) .y. Show that fy^u^ is an isomorphism of
Z(G, A) onto the automorphism group Aut(E) of the extension E. This iso-
morphism maps B(G, A) to the group of automorphisms Int E (*), where x runs
through A.

1 8. With the notation of the above exercise, C(G, A) is used to denote the
group of mappings of G into A. G operates on C(G, A) by the formula

CW) = '(*(*-¥)).

If ct denotes the corresponding homomorphism of G into Aut(G(G, A)), the
semi-direct product G(G, A) x a G is denoted by E .

(a) Let s: A -&gt; C(G, A) be the mapping which associates with each a e A
the constant mapping equal to a. Show that e is an injective homomorphism,
compatible with the action of G.

(b) Let A -4- E -&gt; G be an extension of G by A such that i ( a a) = xi (a) * " x if
a e A, x e E and g = /&gt;(*). Let p be a mapping G -&gt; E such that p o p = Id G .
For all x e E, let § x be the mapping of G into A such that

MP^g) = «(&lt;M*))p(*) for all ^eG.
Show that

+** = 4&gt;* + **M&gt;v if*,yeE.

Deduce that the mapping O: E -&gt; E defined by

is a homomorphism which makes the following diagram commutative:

A -i&gt; E -U G



lido

C(G 3 A) — ► E — &gt; G .
(c) A G-mean on A is a homomorphism

m:C(G,A)-&gt;A
satisfying the two following conditions:
(cj) m o s = Id A
(&lt;r a ) m(*&lt;j&gt;) = *m(&lt;j&gt;) if £ e G, &lt;j&gt; e G(G, A).



149



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

Let m be a G-mean on A. Show that, if &lt;j&gt; is a crossed homoiriorphism and
a = m(&lt;j&gt;), then &lt;j&gt; = 0_ a (cf. Exercise 7). In particular,

Z(G,A) =B(G,A).

Show that the mapping (&lt;j&gt;, g) h-&gt; (m (&lt;{&gt;), g) is a homomorphism of E into
Ax,G. Deduce that every extension E of G by A satisfying the condition in

(b) is isomorphic to A x ,G (use the composition E -&gt; E -&gt; A x T G) and
hence admits a section. Show that two such sections are transformed one into
the other by an inner automorphism of E defined by an element of A (use
Exercise 7 and the fact that Z(G, A) = B(G, A)).

(d) Suppose that G is finite of order n and that the mapping a ■-». na is an
automorphism of A. For all § e C(G, A), let m(&lt;j&gt;) denote the unique element
of A such that

n.m($) =-£*&gt;(£)•

fir € u-

Show that m is a G-mean on A.

This applies in particular when A is finite of order prime to n.

% 9. Let F -&gt; E -&gt; G be an extension of finite groups. Suppose no prime
number divides both the order of F and the order of G.

(a) Suppose F is solvable. Show that there exists a section s: G-&gt;E and
that two such sections are conjugate by an element of F. (Argue by induction
on the solvability class of F; where F is commutative, use the preceding
Exercise.)

(b) Show the existence of a sectionf s: G -&gt; E without assuming that F is
solvable. (Argue by induction on the order of G. If p divides the order of F,
choose a Sylow /(-subgroup P of F and consider its normalizer N in E. The
image of N in G is equal to G, cf. Exercise 25. If N ^ E, conclude by means
of the induction hypothesis; if N = E, use (a) and the induction hypothesis
applied to F/P -&gt; E/P -&gt; G.)

^[10. Let G be a solvable finite group of order mn, where m and n have no
common prime factor. Show that there exists a subgroup H of G of order m
and that every subgroup of G whose order divides m is contained in a conjugate
of H ("Hall's Theorem").*

(Argue by induction on the order of G. If mn # 1, choose a commutative
subgroup A of G which is normal and not equal to {e} and whose order a is
a power of a prime number. Apply this induction hypothesis to G/A and to
(m/a, n) or (m, nja) according to whether a divides m or n. In the second case,
use Exercise 9 to pass from G/A to G.)



f Here again it can be shown that two such sections are conjugate, cf. Feit and
Thompson, Proc. Nat. Acad. Scu, U.S.A., 48, 1962, 968-970.

150



EXERCISES



11. Show that the simple group 2l 8 of order 60 contains no subgroup of
order 15.

1f 12. Let G be a nilpotent group and H the set of elements of G of finite
order.

(a) Show that H is a subgroup of G.

(b) Show that every finite subset of H generates a finite subgroup.

(c) Show that two elements of H of relatively prime orders commute.

13. Let G be a nilpotent group. Show that G is finite (resp. countable} if
andonlyifG/D(G)is. ;

14. Let G be a finite group. Suppose that, for all *, y e G, the subgroup of G
generated by {*, y) is nilpotent. Show that G is nilpotent (apply the hypothesis
to x and y of orders # l and/£ 2 , where p x and/&gt; 2 are distinct prime numbers).

15. Let G be a group and X a subset of G generating G.

(a) Write X x = X; for n ^ 2, define X n , by induction on n, as the set of
commutators (x,y), x e X, y e X n _ x . Show that X n = {e} if and only if G is
nilpotent of class ^n. (Argue by induction on n. If X n = {*}, show that the
subgroup H of G generated by X n _ x is contained in the centre of G and apply
the induction hypothesis to G/H.)

(b) Show that C n (G) is a normal subgroup of G generated by X n . Deduce
that the image of X n in G n (G)/C n + 1 (G) generates the group C n (G)/C n + 1 (G).

(c) Take G = 6 m (m &gt; 4) and X = {s, t}, where s is a transposition and / a
cycle of order m. Show that X 2 does not generate the group C 2 (G) = 2l m .

16. *Let V be a vector space over a commutative field k and

w = Av

(cf. Ill, § 7, no. 1). On E = V x W a law of composition is defined by the
formula

(»!, w x ) . (v 2 , w 2 ) = (v x + v 2 , w x + w 2 + Vl A v 2 ).

(a) Show that this law gives E a group structure, that of a central extension
of V by W.

(b) Suppose the characteristic of k is different from 2. Show that the derived
group D(E) is the set of (0, w), w e W; it is a group isomorphic to W. Show
that, if dim(V) ^ 4, there exist elements of D(E) which are not commutators.*

17. Let G be a finite commutative group. Show the equivalence of the
following conditions:

(a) G is cyclic.

(b) Every Sylow subgroup of G is cyclic.

151



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(c) For every prime number /&gt;, the number of elements x eG such that

x p = e is ^p.

18. Let n be an integer ^ 1 and let G be a commutative group written
additively, such that nx = for all x e G. Let H be a subgroup of G and fa.
homomorphism of H into Z/riZ.

(a) Let x e G and let q be the order of the image of* in G/H; then qx e H.
Show that there exists a 6 Z/nZ such that qcc =f(x). Deduce the existence of
an extension off to the subgroup of G generated by H and x.

(b) Show that /extends to a homomorphism of G into Z/raZ (use Zorn's
Lemma).

19. Let G be a finite commutative group.

(a) Show that there exists an element xeG whose order n is a multiple of
the orders of the elements of G. (Use the decomposition of G as a product of
^-groups.) Show that the subgroup H generated by such an element is a direct
factor of G (apply the above exercise to construct a homomorphism G -&gt; H
whose restriction to H is the identity).

(b) Show that G is a direct product of cyclic groups. (Argue by induction on
Card(G) using (a).) (Cf. VII, § 4, no. 6.)



20. Let G be a finite commutative group written additively. Let x = 2L, g



x = 2-,
and let G 2 be the subgroup of G consisting of the elements g such that 2g = 0.

(a) Show that x = 2i, p.

(b) Show that x = if Card(G 2 ) # 2. If Card(G 2 ) = 2, show that x is the
unique non-zero element of G 2 .

(c) Show that Card(G 2 ) = 2 if and only if the Sylow 2-subgroup of G is
cyclic and #0.

(d) *Let p be a prime number. Show that

{p - 1)! = -1 (mod/*).
(Apply (b) to the multiplicative group of the field Z//&gt;Z.)

21. Let/&gt; and q be two prime numbers such that/&gt; &gt; q.

(a) Show that every finite group G of order pq is an extension of ZjqL by
Z//&gt;Z (note that every Sylow /^subgroup of G is normal). If further p &amp; 1
(mod q), show that G is cyclic.

(b) Deduce that the centre of a group cannot be of index 69.

(c) Show that, if p = 1 (mod q), there exist a group of order pq whose centre
is{*}.

(d) Show that every non-commutative group of order 6 is isomorphic to @ 3 .

22. Let G be a finite group of order n &gt; 1 and let p be the least prime
152



EXERCISES



number dividing n. Let P be a Sylow /^-subgroup of G and N its normalizer.
Show that, if P is cyclic, P is contained in the centre of N (show that the order
of N/P is prime to the order of the automorphism group of P).

*[[ 23. Let a be an automorphism of a group G.

(a) Show the equivalence of the following conditions :
(i) a(x) = x implies x = e.

(ii) The mapping x y-&gt; x~ ^(x) is injective.
When these conditions are satisfied, a is said (by an abuse of language) to be
without fixed point.

(b) Suppose G is finite and er without fixed point. The mapping Xh^x~ 1 a(x)
is then bijective. If H is a normal subgroup of G stable under &lt;r, show that the
automorphism of G/H defined by a is without fixed point.

(c) Under the hypotheses of (b), letp be a prime number. Show that there
exists a Sylow /^-subgroup P of G which is stable under a. (If P is a Sylow p-
subgroup, there exists y e G such that a(P ) = yP y _1 ; write y~ x in the form
x~ 1 a{x) and take P = xPqX- 1 .) Show that such a subgroup is unique and
contains every ^-subgroup of G which is stable under a.

(d) Suppose further that a is of order 2. Show that a(g) = g~ * for all g e G
(write g in the form x ~ x a(x) with *gG). Deduce that G is commutative and of
odd order.

24. Let G be a finite group, H a Sylow subgroup of G and N the normalizer
of H. Let X 1} X 2 be two subsets of the centre of H and s e G such that
■yX^ -1 = X 2 . Show that there exists «eN such that nxn~ x = sxs' 1 for all
x e X x (apply the theorem on the conjugacy of Sylow subgroups to the central-
izer of Xj). Deduce that two central elements of H are conjugate in G if and
only if they are so in N.

25. Let &lt;j&gt;: G -&gt; G' be a surjective homomorphism of finite groups; let P be
a Sylow /(-subgroup of G.

(a) Let P x be a Sylow ^-subgroup of G such that &lt;j&gt;(P) = &lt;K P 0- Show that
there exists an element x of the kernel of cj&gt; such that Pj = sP* -1 .

(b) Let N (resp. N') be the normalizer in G (resp. G') of P (resp. &lt;})(P)).
Show that (j)(N) = N'. In particular, if the order of G' is not divisible by p,
then (J)(P) = {e} and (j&gt;(N) = G'.

If 26. Let G be a finite group. G is called supersolvable if there exists a
composition series (G,) 0&lt;i&lt;n of G consisting of normal subgroups of G such
that the quotients G,/G 1 + 1 are cyclic.

(a) Show that every subgroup, every quotient group and every finite
product of supersolvable groups is supersolvable.

(b) Show that nilpotent =&gt; supersolvable =&gt; solvable and that the converse
implications are false.

153



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(c) Suppose G is supersolvable. Show that, if G ^ {1}, there exists a normal
subgroup C of G which is cyclic of prime order. Show that the derived group
D(G) of G is nilpotent. Show that every subgroup of G distinct from G which
is maximal is of prime index.

(d) A finite group G is bicyclic if there exist two elements a, b of G such that,
if C and C 6 denote the cyclic subgroups generated by a and b respectively,
then G = C a C b = C 6 C a . Show that every bicyclic group is supersolvable.
(Reduce it to proving that there exists in G a normal cyclic subgroup N ^ {1}.
Attention may be confined to the case where C a n C b = {1}; let m ^ n&gt; 1
be the orders of a and b respectively; by considering the elements b~ x a k , where
^ k &lt; m — 1, show that there exists an integer s such that a s ^ 1 and
b~ x a s b e C ; the set of a s with this property is the desired cyclic subgroup N.)

27. Let S be a finite group. S is called a minimal simple group if S is simple
and non-commutative and if every subgroup of S distinct from S is solvable.

(a) Show that the alternating group 2l n is minimal simple if and only if
n = 5.

(b) Let G be a finite group. Show that, if G is not solvable, there exist two
subgroups H and K of G with H normal in K such that K/H is a minimal
simple group.

^f 28. Let G be a finite group and p a prime number. An element s e G is
called j&amp;-unipotent (resp. /&gt;-regular) if its order is a power of p (resp. not
divisible by p).

(a) Let x eG. Show that there exists a unique ordered pair (u, t) of elements
of G satisfying the following conditions: u is /&gt;-unipotent, t is j&amp;-regular,
x — ut = tu. (Consider first the case where G is the cyclic group generated by
*.)

(b) Let P be a Sylow /&gt;-group of G, C its centralizer and E the set of p-
regular elements of G. Show that

Gard(E) = Card(E n C) (modp).

Deduce that Card(E) ^ (modp). (Argue by induction on Card(G) and re-
duce it to the case where C = G; then use (a) to show that Card (E) = (G:P).)

^f 29. Let G be a finite group of even order and let H be a Sylow 2-subgroup
of G. For all s eG, let e(s) be the signature of the permutation x h-&gt;- sx of G.

(a) Let s e H. Show that e(s) = — 1 if and only if s generates H.

(b) Show that e is surjective if and only if H is cyclic.

(c) Suppose that H is cyclic. Show that there exists one and only one normal
subgroup D of G such that G is the semi-direct product of H and D. (Argue by
induction on the order of H.) Show that the normalizer N of H in G is the
direct product of H and NnD.

154



EXERCISES

(d) Show that the order of a non-commutative simple group is either oddf
or divisible by 4.

Tf 30. Let p be a prime number, r and t integers &gt;0, Sa cyclic group of
order p r+t and T the subgroup of S of order p*.

(a) If S operates on a finite set E, show that

Card(E) = Card(E T ) (modp r+1 ),

where E T denotes the set of elements of E invariant under T.

(b) Let m, n ^ 0. Show that



ffl - a &lt;«*"&gt;■



(Let M be a set with m elements and E the set of subsets of S x M with p l n
elements. Define an operation of S on S x M such that there exists a bijection
of E T onto the set of subsets of (S/T) x M with n elements; apply (a).)

31. Let G be a finite group and S a Sylow /^-subgroup of G. Let r, t be
integers ^0 such that Card(S) = p r+t . Let E be the set of subgroups of G of
order pK

(a) Suppose that S is cyclic. Show that Card(E) = 1 (modp r+1 ). (Let S
operate on E by conjugation and use Exercise 30.) Deduce that, if the subgroup
of S of order p l is not normal in G, there are at least 1 + p r + x Sylow/&gt;-subgroups
inG.

(b) Show that Card(E) = 1 (modp) even if S is not cyclic. (Let G operate
by translation on the set F of subsets of G with p* elements. Show that the
elements of E give distinct orbits with (G: S)p r elements and that all the other
orbits have a number of elements divisible by p r + 1 . Apply Exercise 30.)

^f 32. Let/&gt; be a prime number and G a /&gt;-group. Let G* = G P D(G) be the
subgroup of G generated by D(G) and the x p , xeG.

(a) Show that G* is the intersection of the kernels of the homomorphisms
ofGintoZ//&gt;Z.

(b) Show that a subset S of G generates G if and only if the image of S in
G/G* generates G/G*. Deduce that, if (G:G*) = p n , the integer n is the
minimum number of elements in a subset of G which generates G; in particular,
G is cyclic if and only if n ^ 1 .

(c) Let u be an automorphism of G of order prime to p and let u be the
corresponding automorphism of G/G*. Show that u = 1 implies u = 1.

^[ 33. Let G be a /&gt;-group and A its automorphism group.

(a) Let (Gj) 0sSi&lt;n be a composition series of G such that (G^Gj + j) = p for



t In fact this case is impossible, as has been shown by Feit and Thompson, Pac.
J. of Math., 13 (1963), 775-1029.

155



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

^ i ' ^ n — 1 . Let P be the subgroup of A consisting of the automorphisms
u such that, for all i and all x e G ( , u(x)x~ x e G i + 1 . Show that, if an element
u e P is of order prime top, then u = 1 (argue by induction on n). Deduce that
P is a /&gt;-group.

(b) Conversely, let P be a /^-subgroup of A. Show that there exists a com-
position series (G,) 0&lt;i ^ n of G which is stable under P and such that
(G ( : G { + x) = p for &lt; i ^ n — 1 ; show that the G t may be chosen to be
normal in G.

34. Let^ be a prime number. Show that every group of order p 2 is commuta-
tive.

35. Let G be a group such that the derived group D = D(G) is contained in
the centre C of G.

(a) Show that the mapping (x, y) ►-&gt; (x, y) induces a mapping

4&gt;:(G/C) x (G/C)-&gt;D
such that, writing these groups additively:

&lt;K&lt;x + % y) = &lt;!&gt;(«, y) + &lt;f&gt;(P» y) &lt;K«, P) = -&lt;J&gt;(P, «)
&lt;Ka, p + y) = H*, P) + &lt;!&gt;(«&gt; y) &lt;K«, a ) = °

for all a, p, y e G/C.

(6) Show that, for every integer n,

{yx) n =y n x n (x,y)* n - 1)l2

for x,y eG. Deduce that if n is odd and d n = 1 for all &lt;/gD, the mapping
x h-» * n induces a homomorphism : G/D -&gt; C.

Tf 36. Let p be a prime number and G a non-commutative group of order

P*.

(a) Show that, with the notation of the preceding exercise, C = D and that
G/D is isomorphic to the product of two groups of order p.

(b) Suppose that p is odd and that the homomorphism 6 of the preceding
exercise is non-zero. Show that G is the semi-direct product of a group of order
p by a cyclic group of order p 2 . Show that there exist elements x,y generating
G such that

x" 2 =1, y* = 1, (x,y) = *»,

that G is characterized up to isomorphism by this property (and by the fact
that it is of order p 3 ) and that such a group G exists.

(c) For p = 2, consider the same question as in (b) with the hypothesis
# replaced by the hypothesis that G contains a non-central element of
order 2. Show that such a group is isomorphic to the dihedral group D 4 (cf.
Exercise 4) and also to a Sylow 2-subgroup of €5 4 .

156



EXERCISES



(d) Suppose that p is odd and that the homomorphism of the preceding
exercise is zero. Show that there are elements x, y, z generating G such that

i*&gt;y) = z; x? = y* = z p = (*, z) = (y, z) = 1,

that G is characterized by this property and that such a group exists.

♦Show that G is isomorphic to the multiplicative group of matrices of the
form

(lab




with coefficients a, b,c in the field with/&gt; elements. *

(e) Suppose that p = 2 and that no non-central element of G is of order 2
(hence that they are all of order 4). Show that G is generated by elements x, y
such that

x 2 =y 2 = (x,y); (*,y) 2 =l,

that G is characterized by this property and is isomorphic to the quaternionic
group (cf. Exercise 4).

(/) *Is the group of matrices

'I a b\

1

[0 I

where a, b, c run through the field with 2 elements, of type (c) or of type (e) ?*

37. (a) Let G be a finite group, H a normal subgroup of G, p a prime number
not dividing the order of H and P a Sylow /(-subgroup of G. Show that HP is
the semi-direct product of P by H.

(b) We say that a finite group G has property (ST) if there exists a number-
ing Px&gt; - • -tPs of distinct prime numbers dividing the order



,°i &gt;.°t



n=pl

of G and Sylow /&gt; r subgroups P l5 . . ., P 8 of G such that, for 1 ^ i ^ j, the set
G t = Pi p 2 ... P { is a normal subgroup of G. Show that, if this is so, G { does not
depend on the choice of the P 4 ; it is the unique subgroup of G of order p\ x . . .p? ;
further, G 4 is the semi-direct product of P { by G^x.

(c) Show that a finite group G has property (ST) if and only if there exists a
Sylow subgroup P of G which is normal in G and such that G/P has property
(ST). v r 7

(d) Show that every subgroup, every quotient group and every central
extension of a group with property (ST) has property (ST).

157



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

If 38. Let G be a finite group of order n = p a m, where p is a prime number
not dividing m, and let X be the set of Sylow /(-subgroups of G. Let P e X, let
N be the normalizer of P and r = Card(X).

(a) Show that r = (G:N). Deduce that r belongs to the set R of positive
divisors of m which are congruent to 1 (mod/*)- In particular, if R is {1}, P is
normal in G.

(b) If a = 1, show that the number of elements of G of order p is r(p — 1).
If further N = P, show that the elements of G of order different from p are
equal in number to m; if further m is a power of a prime number q, deduce that
a Sylow y-subgroup Q of G contains all the elements of G of order different
from p and hence is normal in G.

(c) Let H be a group of order 210. Show that H contains a normal subgroup
G of order 105 (cf. Exercise 29). Let/&gt; = 3 (resp. 5, 7). Show that, if G has no
normal Sylow /(-subgroup, the group G contains at least 14 (resp. 84, 90)
elements of order p. Conclude that H and G have property (ST) (cf. the
preceding exercise).

(d) Show that every group of order n ^ 100 has property (ST), except
possibly if n = 24, 36, 48, 60, 72, 96 (same method as in (c)).

(e) Show that the group 6 4 , of order 24, does not have property (ST). Con-
struct analogous examples for n = 48, 60, 72, 96. (For n = 36, see the follow-
ing exercise.)

Tf 39. Let G be a finite group, n = Card(G), p a prime number, X the set of
Sylow /(-subgroups of G and r = Card(X). Then G operates transitively on X
by conjugation; let §: G-&gt;6 X m €&gt; r be the corresponding homomorphism
(AsB denotes the relation "A is isomorphic to B") and K its kernel.

(a) Show that K is the intersection of the normalizers of the P e X and that
the Sylow /(-subgroup of K is the intersection of the P e X. Deduce that if
r &gt; 1 the order k of K divides n/rp.

(b) Show that if G has no subgroup of index 2, then (f&gt;(G) c 2l x and that if
n = kr\ (resp. $kr\), then §(G) = @ x (resp. 2l x ).

(c) Using (a), (b) and the preceding exercise, show the following facts:
If n = 12 and a Sylow 3-subgroup of G is not normal, then G x 9l 4 .
If n = 24 and G does not have property (ST), then G a €&gt; 4 .

If n = 36, then G has property (ST). (Show that if a Sylow 3-subgroup of G
is not normal, then G contains a subgroup K of order 3 such that G/K a 2i 4
and that K is central.)

If n = 48 and G does not have property (ST), then G contains a normal sub-
group K of order 2 such that G/K » €5 4 .

If n = 60 and G does not have property (ST), then G x 2l 5 . (Show that
such a group G has no normal subgroup of order 5, nor of order 2, nor of
index 2. Deduce that G is isomorphic to a subgroup of @ 6 and, arguing as in
Exercise 25 of § 5, that G x 9t 5 .)

158



EXERCISES

If n = 72 and a Sylow 3-subgroup of G is not normal, then G contains a
normal subgroup K such that G/K is isomorphic either to 6 4 or to 2t 4 .

If n = 96 and a Sylow 2-subgroup of G is not normal, then G contains a
normal subgroup K such that G/K « © 3 .

(d) Show that a group G of order ^ 100 is solvable unless G » 2l 5 .

40. Let Gj, G 2 be two groups and G a subgroup of Gj x G 2 such that
pr x G = G 1} pr 2 G = G 2 ; identifying G x and G 2 with Gj x {e 2 } and {e x } x G 2
respectively, H a = G n G x and H 2 = G n G 2 are normal subgroups of G
such that G/H x is isomorphic to G 2 and G/H 2 isomorphic to G v

(a) Show that for G to be normal in G x x G 2 , it is necessary and sufficient
that G contain the commutator group D(G X x G 2 ) = D(G a ) x D(G 2 ) (prove
that G contains D(G X ) by writing xzx~ x z~ 1 e G for x e G x and z e G). Deduce
that Gi/Hi is commutative.

(b) If G is normal in G x x G 2 , show that a homomorphism is defined of
Gi x G 2 onto Gj/Hj by associating with each ordered pair (s lt s 2 ) the coset of
Sxti 1 modulo H 1} where t x e G x is such that (t u s 2 ) e G. Deduce that
(G x x G 2 )/G is isomorphic to G/(Hi x H 2 ).

41. Let x,y be two elements of a group G.

(a) For there to exist a, b in G such that bay = xab, it is necessary and
sufficient that xy~ x be a commutator.

(b) For there to exist 2n + I elements a lt a 2 , . . ., a 2n + 1 in G such that

x = a x a 2 . . .a 2n + 1 and y = a 2n + 1 a 2n . . .a l9

it is necessary and sufficient that xy ~ x be a product of n commutators (argue by
induction on n).

§7

1 . Enumerate the elements of length ^ 4 in M(X) when X consists of a single
element.

2. Let X be a set and M one of the magmas M (X) , Mo(X) or N (X) . Show that
every automorphism of M leaves X stable. Deduce an isomorphism of 6 X onto
the group Aut(M).

Show that the endomorphisms of M correspond bijectively to the mappings
of X into M.

3. Let X be a set and M a the free magma constructed on a set {a} with one
element. Let p denote the homomorphism of M(X) into M a which maps every
element of X onto a; on the other hand let X: M(X) -&gt; Mo(X) be the homo-
morphism defined in no. 9. Show that the mapping w i-&gt; (k(w), p(w)) is an
isomorphism of M(X) onto the submagma of Mo(X) x M a consisting of the
ordered pairs (u, v) where u and v have the same length.

159



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

^ 4. Let X be a set and c an element not belonging to X. We write
Y = Xu {c}. Let M be the magma with underlying set Mo(Y) and law of
composition given by (u, v) ■-»&gt; cuv. Let L be the submagma of M generated by
X and let e be the mapping from Y to Z equal to - 1 on X and to 1 at c.

(a) Show that L is the subset of M consisting of the words w = y x . . .y p ,
y K e Y, satisfying the two following conditions:

(i) s( yi ) + • • • + z{y p ) = - 1

(ii) z\y 1 ) + ■■■ + e(y,) ^ for 1 ^ i &lt; p - 1.
Show that every element of L — X may be written uniquely in the form cuv
with u, v £ L.

(The elements w satisfying (i) and (ii) form a submagma L' of M containing
X. If w — y x ■ • -y P belongs to L', let k be the least integer such that
e ( yi ) + . . . + z{y k ) = 0; show that y x = c and that the elements u = y 2 . . .y k
and v — y k + 1 . . -y p belong to L'; then w = cuv, whence by induction onp the
relation weL. Then show that the relations u', v' e L and w = cu'v' imply
u' — u,v' = v.)

(b) Show that the injection of X into L extends to an isomorphism of M(X)
onto L.

5. Let X be a set with one element. If n is an integer ^ 1, let u n denote the
number of elements in M(X) of length n.

(a) For every set Y, show that

Card(M n (Y)) = Mn .Card(Y) n .

(Use Exercise 3.)

(b) Establish the relation



71— X

u n — 2^ u p u n _ p for n ^ 2.



(c) *Let/(T) be the formal power series 2* u n T n . Show that
/(T) = T +/(T) 2 .
Deduce the formulae

/(T) = *(1 " (1 - 4T ) 1/2 )&gt; u n = ^l.3.5...(2n-3) for n &gt; 2.*
Obtain the last result using Exercise 11 of Set Theory, III, § 5.

f 6. Let X be a set.

(a) Let N be a submagma of M(X) and Y = N — (N.N). The injection
Y-&gt;N extends to a homomorphism u: M(Y) -*-N. Show that u is an iso-
morphism. (In other words, every submagma of a free magma is free.)

160



EXERCISES

(b) If x e M(X), let M* denote the submagma of M(X) generated by *;
by (a), M x is identified with the free magma constructed on x. Show that, if
x,yeM(X), then either M* c= M y or M y c M x or M x r\M y = 0. (If
M x n M w ^ 0, let z be an element of M x n M y of minimum length; show
that either z — x or z = y.)

1j 7. Let M x be the free magma constructed on a set {x} with one element.

(a) For all y e M x , show that there exists a unique endomorphism/j, of M*
such that f v (x) — y; it is an isomorphism of M x onto the submagma M y
generated by y (cf. Exercise 6).

(b) If y, z e M x , we write y o z =f y (z). Show that the law of composition
(y, z) &gt;-&gt;-y o z makes M x into a monoid with identity element x which is iso-
morphic to the monoid End(M Jf ) of endomorphisms ofM r

(c) Let N be the set of monogenous submagmas of M x distinct from M x . An
element y of M^ is called primitive if M y is a maximal element of N. Show that
xx, x(x(xx)) are primitive whereas x, (xx)(xx) are not.

(d ) Let P be the set of primitive elements of M*. Show that, ify, z e P, y ^ z,
then Mj, n M z = (use Exercise 6).

(e) Let Mo(P) be the free monoid constructed on P. If M* is given the
monoid structure defined in (b), the injection P -&gt; M* can be extended to a
homomorphism/*: Mo(P) -&gt; M x . Show that/&gt; is an isomorphism.

(If z e M*, show by induction on l(z) that z g lm(p). On the other hand,
if yi,---&gt;y n &gt; z lt ... 9 z m eP are such that £(y x . . .y n ) = p(z 1 ...z m ), then
M yi n M Z1 # 0, whence y x = z x and f Vl (p{y 2 . • .y»)) ^fvM^- • • *»));
whence /&gt;(y 2 . . .y n ) = /»(z 2 . . .z m ) and it follows that y x . . .y n = z x . . .z m
arguing by induction on sup(w, m).)

8. Let X be a set; for every integer q ^ let Mo(X) g be the set of elements
of Mo(X) of length q and let Mo (9) (X) be the union of Mo(X) n „ neN. The
injection Mo(X) g -&gt; Mo (q) (X) extends to a homomorphism

Mo(Mo(X) 9 )^Mo te) (X);

show that this homomorphism is bijective if q ^ 1.

9. Let x,y e X with x # y. Show that the submonoid of Mo(X) generated
by {x, xy, yx} is not isomorphic to a free monoid.

10. Show that the group defined by the presentation

&lt;*, y ; xy 2 = y 3 x, yx 2 = * 3 y&gt;

reduces to the identity element.

(The first relation implies x 2 y 8 x~ 2 = y 18 and x 3 y 8 x~ 3 = y 27 ; use the second
relation to deduce thaty 18 = y 27 , whence y 9 = e; the fact thaty 2 is conjugate
to y 3 then implies y = e, whence x — e.)

161



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

11. The group defined by the presentation &lt;*,y; * 2 ,y 3 , (xy) 2 } is isomorphic
to ® a .

Tf 12. The group defined by the presentation &lt;*,y; x 3 ,y 2 , (xy) 3 } is iso-
morphic to 2l 4 . (Show that the conjugates of y form, with the identity element,
a normal subgroup of order &lt;4 and index ^3.)

13. Let G be a group and X a subset of G disjoint from X" 1 . Let
S = XuX" 1 . Show the equivalence of the two following properties:

(i) X is a free family in G.

(ii) No product s x . . .s ni withn ^ l,s t e S and s t s l + 1 # *for 1 &lt; z &lt; « — 1,
is equal to e.

14. A group G is called free if it possesses a basic family and hence is iso-
morphic to a free group F(X) constructed on a set X.

(a) Show that, if (^) i6 i and (tf)j eJ are two such families, then
Card(I) = Card(J). (When Card(I) is infinite, show that Card(J) is also and
that both are equal to Card(G). When Card(I) is an integer d, show that the
number of subgroups of index 2 in G is 2 d — 1 .)

The cardinal of a basic family of G is called the rank of G.

(b) A free group is of rank (resp. 1) if and only if it reduces to {e} (resp. is
isomorphic to Z).

(c) Let G be a free group of finite rank d and (# 1} . . . , x d ) a generating
family of d elements of G. Show that this family is basic. (Use Exercise 34 and
§ 5, Exercise 5.)

(d) Show that a free group of rank ^ 2 contains a free subgroup of given
rank d for every cardinal d &lt; X . (Use Exercise 22.)

f 15. Let G be a group with presentation (t, r), where t = (/ 4 ) j6l and
r = (r,), 6j ; let F((T i ) &lt;eI ) denote the free group F(I) and T = (T,). On the
other hand, let x = (^ a ) aeA be a generating family of G; write

F(A) = F((X a ) aeX ),

X = (X a ) and R x the set of relators of x; it is a normal subgroup of F(A). For
all iel, let &lt;j&gt;i(X) be an element of F(A) such that t t = &lt;J&gt; 4 (x) in G; for all
a e A, let &lt;{&gt; a (T) be an element of F(I) such that * a = &lt;J/ a (t) in G. Show that
R x is the normal subgroup of F(A) generated by the elements X~ 1 ^ a (&lt;J&gt;i(X) i6l ),
aeA and r y (&lt;|) J (X) i6l )jeJ. (If R x denotes the normal subgroup of F(A)
generated by the elements in question, then R x c: R x ; on the other hand, show
that the homomorphism F(I) -&gt; F(A) defined by the &lt;j&gt;{ gives, when passing to
the quotient, a homomorphism G-&gt;F(A)/R X the inverse of the canonical
homomorphism F(A)/R X -&gt; F(A)/R X = G.)

16. A group is called finitely generated (resp. finitely presented) if it admits a
162



EXERCISES



presentation &lt;(Oiei» Oy)y 6J &gt; where I is a finite set (resp. where I and J are
finite sets).

(a) Let G be a finitely presented group and x = (* a )„ 6A a finite generating
family of G. Show that there exists a finite family s = (s k ) keK of relators of the
family x such that (x, s) is a presentation of G. (Use the preceding exercise.)

(b) Show that a finite group is finitely presented.

(c) Give an example of a finitely presented group with a subgroup which is
not finitely generated.

(d) If G is a finitely presented group and H a normal subgroup of G, show
the equivalence of the following properties:

(i) G/H is finitely presented.

(ii) There exists a finite subset X of G such that H is the normal subgroup
of G generated by X.

(iii) If (H,) ieI is a right directed family of normal subgroup of G whose
union is equal to H, there exists iel such that H 4 = H.

(Use (a) to prove that (i) implies (ii).)

(e) If G is a finitely presented group, show that G/C r (G) is for all r ^ 1.
(Use § 6, Exercise 15.)

(/) Let (G a ) aeA be a family of groups and let G = I 1 G a be the product
of the G a . Show that G is finitely generated (resp. finitely presented) if and
only if each of the G a is finitely generated (resp. finitely presented) and
G« = {e} for all but a finite number of a.

11 17. (a) Show that every subgroup of a finitely generated nilpotent group
is finitely generated. (In the commutative case, argue by induction on the
minimum number of generators of the group; then proceed by induction on the
nilpotency class of the group.)

Give an example of a finitely generated solvable group containing a sub-
group which is not finitely generated.

(b) Show that every finitely generated nilpotent group is finitely presented.
(Write the group in the form F(X)/R, with X finite, and choose r such that
R =&gt; G r (F(X)) ; use (a) to show that R/C r (F(X)) is finitely generated; observe
that F(X)/C r (F(X)) is finitely presented, cf. Exercise 16.)

18. Let S be a symmetric subset of a group G. Two elements g lt g 2 of G are
called ^-neighbours if g^ gx belongs to S. A sequence {g x , ...,g n ) of elements
of G is called an S-chain if g t and g i+1 are S-neighbours for 1 &lt; i ^ n - 1 ; the
elements g x and g n are called respectively the beginning and the end of the
chain.

(a) Let Y be a subset of G and R Y |a, b\ the relation "there exists an S-chain
in Y beginning at a and ending at b". Show that R Y is an equivalence relation
on Y (cf. Set Theory, II, § 6, Exercise 10) ; the equivalence classes under this
relation are called the connected S-components of Y. Y is called ^-connected if it has
at most one connected component.

163



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(b) Show that G is S-connected if and only if S generates G.

(c) Suppose that no element s e S satisfies the relation s 2 = e; choose a
subset X of S such that S is the disjoint union of X and X" K Show the equiva-
lence of the following conditions :

(i) The family X is free.

(ii) There exists no S-chain (g 1} . . . , £ n ) in G consisting of distinct elements
n $s 3 in number such that g x and g n are S-neighbours.
(Use Exercise 13.)

If 19. Let X be a set, G = F(X) the free group constructed on X and
S = XuX~ 1 .

(a) Ug e G, every sequence (s ly ...,s n ) of elements of S such that£ = s x . . . s n
and s t s i + 1 ^ e for 1 &lt; i &lt; n is called a reduced decomposition of g. Show that
every element of G admits one and only one reduced decomposition; the
integer n is the length of g (cf. Exercise 26).

(b) Let Y be a subset of G containing e. Show the equivalence of the follow-
ing conditions:

(ii) Y is S-connected (cf. Exercise 18).

(6 2 ) For all g e Y, if (s lt . . . , s n ) is the reduced decomposition of g, then
St . . . s t e Y for 1 ^ i ^ n.

(c) Let Y x and Y 2 be two non-empty S-connected subsets of G such that
Y x n Y 2 = . Show that there exists at most one ordered pair

(yi'^eYi x Y 2

such that y x and y 2 are S-neighbours. There exists one if and only if Y x U Y 2
is S-connected; Y x and Y 2 are then said to be neighbours.

(d) Let Y l9 . . . , Y n be a sequence of disjoint non-empty S-connected subsets
of G. Suppose that Y f and Y J + 1 are neighbours for 1 ^ i &lt; n. Show that, if
n ^ 3, Y x and Y n are not neighbours.

^f 20. We preserve the notation of the preceding exercise. Let H be a sub-
group of G.

(a) Let R H be the set of S-connected subsets T of G such that AT n T =
if h e H, h # e. Show that R H is inductive for the relation of inclusion.

(b) Let Y be a maximal element of R H . Show that G = U^ AY, in other
words Y is a system of representatives of the right cosets modulo H. (If
G' = U AY is distinct from G, show that there exist xeG' and y 6 Y which are
S-neighbours and deduce that Y U {*} belongs to R H .)

(c) Let S H be the set of elements A e H such that Y and AY are neighbours.
It is a symmetric subset of H. Show that an element A £ H belongs to S H if and
only if A # e and there exist y, y' e Y, s e S with ys = hy'.

Show that S H generates H. (If H' is the subgroup of H generated by S H .

164



EXERCISES



prove that ft U , hY is a connected S-component of G.) Obtain this result by
means of Exercise 14 of § 4.

(d) Let X H be a subset of S H such that S H is the disjoint union of X H and
Xh 1 (show that such a subset exists).

Show that X H is a basic family for H and in particular that H is a free group
("Nielsen-Sckreier Theorem"). (Apply the criterion of Exercise 18(c) to H to-
gether with S H , noting that two elements h, h' of H are S H -neighbours if and
only if AY and h'Y are neighbouring subsets of G. Use Exercise 19(d) to prove
that S H satisfies condition (ii) in Exercise 18(c).)

(e) Let d = (G:H) = Gard(Y). Suppose d is finite. Show that:

Card(X H ) = Card(X) = Card(G) if Card(X) is infinite
Gard(X H ) = 1 + d(Card(X) - 1) if Card(X) is finite.

(Let T be a non-empty S-connected finite subset of G and T (resp. T") the
set of ordered pairs of S-neighbouring elements whose first element (resp. both
of whose elements) belongs (resp. belong) toT. Card(T') = 2Card(X)Card(T)
and it should be shown by induction on Card(T) that

Card(T") = 2Card(T) - 2.

Apply the result to T = Y, noting that S H is equipotent to T — T*.)

21 . Let H be a subgroup of a group G of finite index. Show that H is finitely
presented if and only if G is. (It may be assumed that G is finitely generated,
cf. § 4, Exercise 14. Write G in the form G = F/R with F free and finitely
generated; the inverse image F' of H in F is free and finitely generated, cf.
Exercise 20, and H = F'/R. If R is generated (as a normal subgroup of F) by
( r i)y e j&gt; show that it is generated (as a normal subgroup of F') by theyr y y _1 ,
V 6 Y &gt; J e J, where Y denotes a representative system in F of the right cosets
modulo F'.)

22. (a) Let (y n ) neZ be a basic family of a group F. Let &lt;{&gt; be the automor-
phism of F which maps y n to y n + 1 ; this automorphism defines as operation t of
Z on F; let E = F x T Z be the corresponding semi-direct product. Show that
the elements x = («, 1) and# = (y , 0) form a basic family of E. (Let F x&gt;y be
the free group constructed on {x,y} and let/ be the canonical homomorphism
°f ^x. y mt o E. Show that there exists a homomorphism g: E -&gt; F^ t „ such that
£((0, 1)) = * and g((y n , 0)) = x n yx~ n and/and g are inverses of one another.)

(b) Deduce that the normal subgroup of F*, „ generated by y is a free group
with basic family (* n y*- n ) BeZ . Obtain this result by applying Exercise 20 to the
representative system consisting of the x n , neZ.

(c) Extend the above to free groups of arbitrary rank.

23. Let F be a free group with basic family (x,y), x # y. Show that the

165



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

derived group of F has as basic family the family of commutators (x*, y% i G Z,
je2,«^0,y#0.

(Use Exercise 20 or Exercise 32.)

24. Let G be a group, S = G — {e} and F = F(S). For all seS, let x s denote
the corresponding element of F. If s, t e S, let r M denote the element of F
defined by:

r s,t — x&amp;tfiat 1 i? si # « in G

r s, t = *s*t if st = e in G.

Let &lt;J&gt; be the homomorphism of F onto G which maps x s to s and let R be the
kernel of (j&gt;.

Show that the family (r M ) for s, t e S x S, is a basic family of the group R.
(Apply Exercise 20 to the system of representatives of G in F consisting of e
and the x s .)

25. Let G be a group. Show the equivalence of the following properties:

(a) G is a free group.

(b) For every group H and extension E of G by H there exists a section
G-^E.

(To prove that (b) implies (a), take E to be a free group and use Exercise 20.)

n

26. Let X be a set and g an element of the free group F(X). Let£ = 1 = 1 *£ &lt;0 °
be the canonical decomposition of g as a product of powers of elements of
X (cf. no. 5, Proposition 7). The integer l{g) = 2, |m(a) | is called the length of

g-

(a) g is called cyclically reduced if either x x # A^orxj = * n andm(l)m(n) &gt; 0.
Show that every conjugacy class of F(X) contains one and only one cyclically
reduced element; it is the element of minimum length of the class in question.

(b) An element x e F(X) is called primitive if there does not exist an integer
n ^ 2 and an element g g F(X) such that x = g n . Show that every element
z # e of F(X) can be written uniquely in the form x n with n ^ 1 and x primi-
tive. (Reduce it to the case where z is cyclically reduced and observe that, if
z = x n , the element x is also cyclically reduced.)

Show that the centralizer of z is the same as that of x; it is the cyclic subgroup
generated by x.

27. Let G = -¥r A G t be the sum of a family (G,) i6 i of groups amalgamated
by a common subgroup A. For all i e I, choose a subset P, of G, satisfying
condition (A) of no. 3.

(a) Let x g G and let (a; i lt ..., i n ; p lt ...,/&gt;„) be a reduced decomposition
of*; then

n

x = a I \p a , with p a G P (a — {e la }, i a ^ i a+1 .

a — 1

166



EXERCISES

Show that, if ?! ^ i n , the order of* is infinite. Show that, if i x = i n , x is conju-
gate to an element with a decomposition of length &lt; n — 1 .

(b) Deduce that every element of G of finite order is conjugate to an element
of one of the G 4 . In particular, if the G 4 have no element of finite order except e,
the same is true of G.

28. We preserve the notation of the preceding exercise.

(a) Let N be a subgroup of A. Suppose that, for all i e I, the group N is
normal in G 4 . Show that N is normal in G = -¥r A G t and that the canonical
homomorphism of -X- A/N GJN into G/N is an isomorphism.

(b) For all i e I, let H ( be a subgroup of G t and let B be a subgroup of A.
Suppose that H ( nA = B for all i. Show that the canonical homomorphism
of -)f B H t into G is injective; its image is the subgroup of G generated by the
H,.

% 29. Let G = Gj * A G 2 be the sum of two groups G x and G 2 amalgamated
by a subgroup A.

(a) Show that G is finitely generated if G x and G 2 are finitely generated.

(b) Suppose G x and G 2 are finitely presented. Show the equivalence of the
two following properties :

(1) G is finitely presented.

(2) A is finitely generated.

(Show first that (1) implies (2). On the other hand, if A is not finitely
generated, there exists a right directed family (A{) ieI of subgroups of A with

U Aj = A and Aj ^ A for all i. Let H { (resp. H) be the kernel of the canonical

homomorphism of G x * G 2 onto G x * Aj G 2 (resp. onto G). Show that H is
the union of the H, and that H ( # H for all i; then apply Exercise 16(d).)

(c) Deduce an example of a finitely generated group which is not finitely
presented. (Take G x and G 2 to be free groups of rank 2 and A a free group of
finite rank, cf. Exercise 22.)

30. Let A and B be two groups and G = A * B their free product.

(a) Let Z be an element of A\G/A distinct from A. Show that Z contains one
and only one element z of the form

b x a x b 2 a 2 . . A_i0„-A&gt;

with n ^ 1, a t e A — {e}, i,eB - {e}. Show that every element of Z can be
written uniquely in the form aza' with a, a' e A.

(b) Let x eG — A. Let^,. be the homomorphism of A * A into G whose
restriction to the first (resp. second) factor of A * A is the identity (resp. the
mapping a ^xax' 1 ). Show thaty^ is injective. (Write x in the form aza' as
above and reduce it thus to the case x = z; use the uniqueness of reduced
decompositions in G.)

In particular, A n #A# -:l = {e} and the normalizer of A in G is A.

167



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(c) Let T be an element of A\G/B. Show that T contains one and only one
element t of the form

b 1 a 1 b 2 a 2 . . .^ n _ia n -ij

with n ^ 1, a { e A — {e}, b { e B — {e}. Show that every element of T can be
written uniquely in the form alb with a e A, b e B.

(d) Let x e G and let A* be the unique endomorphism of G such that
h x {a) = a if a e A and h x (b) = xbx~ x if b e B. Show that h x is injective. (Same
method as in (b), using the decomposition x = a/6 of (c).) In particular,
An xB* -1 = {e}.

Give an example where h x is not surjective.

31. Let G be the free product of a family (G t ) feI of groups. Let S be the set
of subgroups of G which are conjugate to one of the Gj and the union of the
elements of S.

{a) Let H, H' e S, with H # H', and let x e H - {&lt;?}, *'eH'- {e}. Show
that xx' e G — 0. (Reduce it to the case where H is one of the G,; write H' in
the formyG^ -1 and proceed as in the preceding exercise.)

(b) Let G be a subgroup of G contained in 0. Show that there exists H e S
such that CcH.

(c) Let G be a subgroup of G all of whose elements are of finite order. Show
that G is contained in (cf. Exercise 27) ; deduce that C is contained in a
conjugate of one of the G f .

*H 32. Let A and B be two groups and G = A * B their free product. Let X be
the set of commutators (a, b) with a £ A — {e} and beB -~{e} and
S = XuX" 1 .

(a) Show that X n X -1 = and that, if x is an element of X, there exists
a unique ordered pair a, b in (A — {e}) x (B — {e}) such that (a, b) = x.

(b) Let n ^ 1 and let s 1} . . .,s n be a. sequence of elements of S such that
«Vi + i # efor 1 ^ i &lt; n; leta n e A — {e}, b n e B — {e}, e(n) = ± 1 be such that
s n = ( a n&gt; b n Y (n) ' Let g = s x . . .s n . Show, by induction on n, that the reduced
decomposition of g is of length ^ n + 3 and terminates either with a n b n if
s(n) = 1 or with b n a n if e(n) = — 1.

(c) Let R be the kernel of the canonical projection A * B -&gt; A x B
corresponding (no. 3) to the canonical injections A -&gt; A x B and B -&gt; A x B.
Show that R is a free group with basic family X. (Use (b) to prove that X is
free; if R x is the subgroup of G generated by X, show that R x is normal;
deduce that it coincides with R.)

33. Let E = G * A G' be the sum of two groups amalgamated by a common
subgroup A. Let P (resp. P') be a subset of G (resp. G') satisfying condition (A)
of no. 3.

Let n be an integer ^ 1 . Let L n denote the set of x e E whose reduced de-

168



EXERCISES

composition is of length ^2n — 1. Let M n denote the set of x e E of the form
apip'ip 2 p2- • -PnP'n, with a e A, pi e P — {*},/&gt;,' e P' — {«}; similarly, let M£
denote the set of elements of the form ap' x p x p' 2 p 2 - . ./&gt;n/&gt; n , where a, p it p[ satisfy
the same conditions.

(a) Show that L n , M n and M^ are disjoint and that their union is the set of
elements of E whose reduced decomposition is of length &lt; In.

(b) Construct a bijection e of M n onto M' n such that e(ax) = ae(x) if a e A,
xeM n .

(c) Let X n = L ft u M n and X; = L n U M;; show that G.X n = X n and
G'.X^ = X^.

(d) e extends to a bijection of X n onto X^ by setting e(x) = x if x e L n . Show
that E can operate on X n so that g(x) = gx if g e G, x e X n and
g'(x) = s- 1 ^' £ {x)) ifg' eG',xe X n . Show that, if £ e X n , then g(e) = g.

(e) Let x n : E -&gt; 6 Xn be the homomorphism defined by the action of E on X n
described above and let R n be the kernel of T n . Show that R n n X n = {e};
deduce that the intersection of the R n reduces to e.

(/) When G and G' are finite, show that E is residually finite (cf. § 5,
Exercise 5). (Note that the R n are then subgroups of finite index.)

^f 34. (a) Let (Hj) be a right directed family of normal subgroups of a group
G. Suppose that O H 4 = {e}. Show that, for every group G', the intersection
of the kernels of the canonical homomorphisms G' * G -&gt; G' * (G/H,) is equal
to {&lt;?}.

(b) Let G be the free product of a family (G a ) of groups. Show that, if all
the G a are residually finite (cf. § 5, Exercise 5), so is G. (Reduce it first to the
case where the family is finite, then to the case where it has two elements; by
(a) it may be assumed that the G a are finite, then apply the preceding exercise.)

(c) Deduce that every free group is residually finite.

35. *Let G (resp. G') be the additive group of fractions of the form ajb with
a e Z, b e Z and b not divisible by 2 (resp. by 3). Let E = G * z G' be the sum
of G and G' amalgamated by their common subgroup Z. Show that G and G'
are residually finite, but that E is not. (Prove that the only subgroup of E of
finite index is E.) *

36. Let (G l5 . . ., G n ) and (A 1$ . . ., A n _ x ) be two sequences of groups; for
each i, let &lt;j&gt; t : A^ -&gt; G t and ^ t : Aj -&gt; G J + 1 be two injective homomorphisms;
by these homomorphisms A 4 can be identified both with a subgroup of G { and
with a subgroup of G i + 1 .

(a) Let H x = G l5 H 2 = H x * Al G 2 , . . ., H n = H n _! * An _ l G n . The group
H n is called the sum of the groups (G { ) amalgamated by the subgroups (A,) ;
it is denoted by G x * Al G 2 * Aa ■ ■ • * An -! G n- If T is an arbitrary group, de-
fine a bijection between the homomorphisms of H n into T and the families

169



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

(fu ...,/») of homomorphisms t t : G 4 -&gt; T such that t t o ^ = f J + 1 o &lt;[/, for
1 &lt; t &lt; n - 1.

(6) Each G 4 is identified with the corresponding subgroup of H n . Show that
G f nG i+ i = A, and that G,nG i + 2 = A i nA i + 1 (the latter intersection
being taken in G i + 1 ).

% 37. Let G be a group and S a finite symmetric subset of G generating G.
Let £ denote the set of finite subsets of G, ordered by inclusion; it is a directed
set.

(a) Let TeJ and let B T be the set of connected S-components of G — T (cf.
Exercise 18); let B£ = B T — (£ n B T ). Show that B T is finite (note that, if
T ^ and Z £ B T , there exists t e T and zeZ which are S-neighbours).

(b) Let T, T' e £ with T &lt;= T'. If Z' e B T ,, show that there exists a unique
element ZeB T such that Z' c Z; the mapping /„. : B T , -&gt; B T such that
/ttv(Z') = Z maps B£ onto B^ . The inverse limit of the B T , with T running
through £, is denoted by B. Show that B = lim B£ and that the image of B
in B T is B^ . The set B is called the set of ends of G; it is non-empty if and only if
G is infinite.

(c) Let T be a non-empty S-connected finite subset of G and let ZeB^.
Show that there exist g e G such that ^TnT= and gT C\Z ^ and
that then gT &lt;= Z. Show that there exists Z x e B T such that gZ x contains T and
all the Z' e B T such that Z' # Z (observe that T U U Z' is S-connected and
does not meet gT) ; deduce that, if Z' e B T is different from Z 1} then gZ' &lt;= Z.
Show that, writing T'=Tu gT, the inverse image of Z in B£ consists of at
least n — 1 elements, where n = Card(BT).

(rf) Let S' be a symmetric finite subset of G generating G and B' the set of
ends of G relative to S'. Define a bijection of B onto B' (reduce it to the case
where S c S'). The cardinal of B is thus independent of the choice of S; it is
called the number of ends of G.

(e) Show, using (c), that the number of ends of G is equal to 0, 1, 2 or 2 K °.

(/) Show that the number of ends of Z is 2 and that that of Z n (n *s 2) is 1.

t 38. Let X be a finite set, F(X) the free group constructed on X and
S = XUX" 1 .

(a) Let S n be the set of products s x . . .s m , s t eS, m ^ n. Show that every
connected S-component (cf. Exercise 18) of F(X) — S n contains one and only
one element of the form s x . . .s n + 1 with s t e S and SiS i + 1 # e for 1 &lt; i &lt; n.

(b) Deduce from (a) a bijection of the set B of ends of F(X) (cf. Exercise 37)
onto the set of infinite sequences (s lt . . ., j b , . . .) of elements of S such that
•Vi + i # ' for a11 »• In particular, the number of ends of F(X) is equal to 2 K o if
Card(X) ^ 2.

39. *Let G be a finitely generated group and g the set of symmetric finite
subsets of G containing e, which generate G.

170



EXERCISES

(a) If X e ft and neN, let d n (K) denote the number of elements in G of the
form x 1 . . . x n with x t e X. If X, Y e ft, show that there exists an integer a ^ 1
such that

4(X) &lt; d an (Y) for all neN.

Deduce that lim sup , n . . • does not depend on the choice of X in ft: this
n-oo log(ra) r

limit (finite or infinite) is denoted by e{G).

(b) If X e ft and G is infinite, show that d n (X) &lt; d n+1 (X) for all n. Deduce
that*(G) is &gt;1.

(c) Let H be a finitely generated group. Show that e(H) ^ e(G) if H is
isomorphic to a subgroup (resp. a quotient group) of G. If E is an extension of
G by H, show that e(E) ^ e(H) + *(G), with equality when E = G x H.

(d) Show that e(Z n ) = n.

(e) Let X e ft. Consider the following property:

(i) There exists a real number a &gt; 1 such that d n (X) ^ a n for all sufficiently
large n.

Show that, if property (i) holds for one element of ft, it holds for every element
of ft. G is then said to be of exponential type; this implies e(G) = +oo.

(/) Let G x and G 2 be two groups containing the same subgroup A and let
H = G x * A G 2 the corresponding amalgamated sum. Suppose G x and G 2 are
finitely generated (hence also H is) and G t ^ A for i = 1, 2. Show that H is of
exponential type if at least one of the indices (GjiA), (G 2 :A) is ^3.

(g) Show that a free group of rank ^2 is of exponential type.*

40. *Let n be an integer ^ 2 and T n the group of upper triangular matrices
of order n over Z with all the diagonal terms equal to 1. Let e(T n ) be the
invariant of the group T n defined in Exercise 39. Show that



n

e(T n ) &lt; Z ± i(n - i).



§8

1. Determine all the ring structures on a set of n elements for 2 &lt; n &lt; 7
and also the ideals of these rings.

2. Let A be a ring.

(a) The mapping which associates with a e A the left homothety x h&gt; ax is an
isomorphism of A onto the ring of endomorphisms of the additive group of A
which commute with right homotheties.

(b) Let M be the set of sequences (a, b, c, d) of four elements of A which may

be represented in the form of a table or matrix I 1 . With every element

171



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

( I of M we associate the mapping (x,y) *-*■ (ax + by, ex + dy) of A x A

V df

into itself. Show that a bijection is thus obtained of M onto the ring B of endo-
morphisms of the commutative group A x A which commute with the opera-
tions (x, y) \-+ (xr, yr) for all r e A. Henceforth M is identified with the ring B.
Calculate the product of two matrices.

(c) Show that the subset T of M consisting of the matrices of the form

| I is the subring of M which leaves stable the subgroup A x of A x A.

The mappings I | ^ a and I ) &gt;-»• c are homomorphisms of T into A;

let a and b be their kernels. Show that a + b = T, that ab = {0} and that
ba = b n o is #{0} if A ^ {0} (cf. no. 9, Proposition 6).

(d) If A = Z/2Z, T is not commutative, but the multiplicative group of
invertible elements of T is commutative.

3. Let A be a ring and a e A. If there exists one and only one a' e A such that
ad — I, a is invertible and d = a' 1 (show first that a is left cancellable, then
consider the product add).

4. Let A be a pseudo-ring in which every additive subgroup of A is a left
ideal of A.

(a) If A is a ring, A is canonically isomorphic to ZjnZ for some suitable
integer n.

(b) If A has no unit element and every non-zero element is cancellable, A
is isomorphic to a pseudo-subring of Z.

5. Let M be a monoid, Z &lt;M) the free commutative group with basis M and
u : M -&gt; Z (M) the canonical mapping.

(a) Show that there exists a unique multiplication on Z (M) such that Z (M)
is a ring and such that u is a monoid morphism of the monoid M into the multi-
plicative monoid of the ring Z (M) .

(b) Let A be a ring and »:M-»Aa monoid morphism of the monoid M in-
to the multiplicative monoid of A. There exists a unique ring morphism
/: Z (M) -&gt; A such that

6. Let A be a commutative ring and M a submonoid of the additive group
of A. Let n be an integer &gt;0 such that m n = for m e M.

(a) If n! is not a divisor of zero in A, the product of a family of n elements of
M is zero.

(b) Show that the conclusion in (a) is not necessarily true if n\ is a divisor of
zero in A.

172



EXERCISES



n-l

«!= 2(-l)vQ( w -v)»



7. ForallweN*,

n-l

2

v=o
(use no. 2, Proposition 2).

8. In a ring, the right ideal generated by a left ideal is a two-sided ideal.

9. In a ring, the right annihilator of a right ideal is a two-sided ideal.

10. In a ring A, the two-sided ideal generated by the elements xy — yx,
where x andy run through A, is the smallest of the two-sided ideals a such that
A/o is commutative.

1f 1 1. In a ring A, a two-sided ideal o is said to be irreducible if there exists no
ordered pair of two-sided ideals b, c distinct from a and such that a = b n c.

(a) Show that the intersection of all the irreducible two-sided ideals of A
reduces to (note that the set of two-sided ideals containing no element a #
is inductive and apply Zorn's Lemma).

(b) Deduce that every two-sided ideal a of A is the intersection of all the
irreducible ideals which contain it.

12. Let A be a ring and {&lt;Xi) iel a finite family of left ideals of A such that the
additive group of A is the direct sum of the additive groups a t . If

1 = 2* e^e a 4 ), then e\ = e u e^j = if i =£j and a { = Ae % (write x = x . 1 for

all x e A). Conversely, if (^) ie i is a finite family of idempo tents of A such that

e^j = for i ^ j and 1 = 2-, e t , then A is the direct sum of the left ideals A^.

i

For the ideals A« { to be two-sided, it is necessary and sufficient that the e i be in
the centre of A.

If 13. Let A be a ring and e an idempotent of A.

(a) Show that the additive group of A is the direct sum of the left ideal
a = Ae and the left annihilator b of e (note that, for all x e A, x — xeeb).

(b) Every right ideal b of A is the direct sum of&amp;no and brib.

(c) If Ae = eA, a and b are two-sided ideals of A and define a direct de-
composition of A.

14. Let A be a commutative ring in which there is only a finite number n of
divisors of zero. Show that A has at most (n + l) 2 elements. (Let a lt . . ., a n
be the divisors of zero. Show that the annihilator 3i of a x has at most n + 1
elements and that the quotient ring A/3j has at most n + 1 elements.)

15. A ringoid is a set E with two laws of composition: (a) an associative

173



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

multiplication xy; (b) a law written additively, not everywhere defined (§ 1, no. 1)
and satisfying the following conditions :

(1) it is commutative (in other words, if x + y is defined, so is y + x and
x + y = y + x; x and y are then said to be addible) ;

(2) if* and y are addible, for x + y and z to be addible it suffices that x and
y on the one hand, and y and z on the other, be addible; then x and y + z are
addible and (x + y) + z = x + (y + z) ;

(3) there exists an identity element 0;

(4) if x and z on the one hand, y and z on the other, are addible and
x + z = y + z, then x = y;

(5) if x, y are addible, so are xz and yz (resp. zx and zy) and

(x + y)z = xz + yz

(resp. z(x + y) = zx + zy) for all z e E.
Every ring is a ringoid.

(a) Examine how the definitions and results of § 8 and the above exercises
extend to ringoids (a left ideal of a ringoid E is a subset o of E which is stable
under addition and such that E.a &lt;= a).

(b) Let G be a group with operators and/ and g two endomorphisms of G.
For the mapping x &gt;-+f(x)g(x) to be an endomorphism of G, it is necessary and
sufficient that every element of the subgroup /(G) be permutable with every
element of g(G) ; if this endomorphism is then denoted byf+g and fg is the
composite endomorphism x | - &gt; /(g(*))} show that the set E of endomorphisms of
G with these laws of composition is a ringoid with unit element; for E to be a
ring, it is necessary and sufficient that G be commutative.

For an element fe E to be addible to all the elements of E, it is necessary
and sufficient that /(G) be contained in the centre of G; the set N of these
endomorphisms is a pseduo-ring called the kernel of the ringoid E.

An endomorphism/ of G is called normal if it is permutable with all the inner
automorphisms of G; for every normal stable subgroup H of G, /(G) is then a
normal stable subgroup of G. Show that the set D of normal endomorphisms
of G forms a subringoid of E and that the kernel N is a two-sided ideal in D.f

16. Give examples of ideals a, b, c in the ring Z such that ab # a n b and
(a + b)(a + c) ^ o + be.

§9

1 . Which are the field structures amongst the ring structures determined in
§ 8, Exercise 1 ?



f See H. Fitting, Die Theorie der Automorphismenringe Abelscher Gruppen
und ihre Analogen bei nicht kommutativen Gruppen, Math. Ann., 107 (1933),
514.

174



EXERCISES

2. A finite ring in which every non-zero element is cancellable is a field (cf.
§2, Exercise 6).

3. Let G be a commutative group with operators which is simple (§ 4, no. 4,
Definition 7). Show that the endomorphism ring A of G is a field.

4. Let K be a field. Show that there exists a smallest subfield F of K and that
F is canonically isomorphic either to the field Q,or to the field Z//&gt;Z for some
prime number p. In the first case (resp. second case) K is said to be of charac-
teristic (resp. p).

5. Let K be a commutative field of characteristic ^2; let G be a subgroup
of the additive group of K such that, if H denotes the set consisting of and the
inverses of the elements ^0 of G, H is also a subgroup of the additive group of
K. Show that there exists an element a g K and a subfield K' of K such that
G = aK' (establish first that, if* andy are elements of G such thaty ^ 0, then
x 2 jyeG; deduce that, if x,y, z are elements of G such that z # 0, then
xy/zeG).

6. Let K be a commutative field of characteristic 7^2; let /be a mapping
of K into K such that/(* + y) = /(*) +f(y) f° r all * an d V an d f° r all
x 7^ f{x)f{\jx) = 1. Show that f is an isomorphism of K onto a subfield
ofK (prove that/(* 2 ) = (/(x)) 2 ).

7. Let A be a commutative ring.

(a) Every prime ideal is irreducible (§ 8, Exercise 11).

(b) The set of prime ideals is inductive for the relations &lt;= and =&gt; .

(c) Let o be an ideal of A distinct from A; let t&gt; be the set of # £ A such that
there exists an integer n ^ with x n e a (n depends on x). Show that b is an
ideal and is equal to the intersection of the prime ideals of A containing o.

^[ 8. A ring A is called a Boolean ring if each of its elements is idempotent
(in other words, if x 2 — x for all x e A).

(a) In the set &lt;ip(E) of subsets of a set E, s show that a Boolean ring structure
is defined by setting AB = A n B and A + B = (A n CB) U (B n (JA).
This ring is isomorphic to the ring K E of mappings of E into the ring K = Z/(2)
of integers modulo 2 (consider for each subset X &lt;= E its "characteristic func-
tion" &lt;j&gt; x such that &lt;j&gt; x (#) = 1 if x e X, § x ( x ) = if * £ X).

(b) Every Boolean ring A is commutative and such that x + x = for
x e A (write x + x as an idempotent and then x + y as an idempotent).

(c) If a Boolean ring A contains no divisor of 0, it is reduced to or is iso-
morphic to Z/(2) (if x and y are any two elements of A, show that
xy(x + y) =0). Deduce that in a Boolean ring every prime ideal is maximal.

(d) In a Boolean ring A, every ideal o ^ A is the intersection of the prime
ideals containing a (apply Exercise 7(c)). Deduce that every irreducible ideal

175



ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES



is maximal (in other words, that the notions of irreducible ideal, prime ideal
and maximal ideal coincide in a Boolean ring).

(e) Show that every Boolean ring is isomorphic to a subring of a product
ring K B , where K = Z/(2) (use (&lt;/)).

(/) If Pi (1 ^ i ^ n) are n distinct maximal ideals in a Boolean ring A and
Q _ p| p j} s how that the quotient ring A/a is isomorphic to the product

ring K n . Deduce that every finite Boolean ring is of the form K tt .

(g) In a Boolean ring A, the relation xy = x is an order relation; if it is
denoted by x &lt; y, show that with this relation A is a distributive lattice (Set
Theory, III, § 1, Exercise 16), has a least element a and that, for every ordered
pair (*, y) of elements such that x &lt; y, there exists an element d(x, y) such that
inf(*, d(x,y)) = a, sup(*, d(x,y)) = y. Conversely, if an ordered set A has
these three properties, show that the laws of composition xy = inf (x, y) and
x + y == &lt;/(sup(*,y), inf (*,#)) define a Boolean ring structure on A.

9. Let A be a ring such that x 3 = x for all x e A. It is proposed to prove
that A is commutative.

(a) Show that 6A = {0} and that 2A and 3A are two-sided ideals such that
2A + 3A = A and 2A n 3A = {0}. Deduce that it can be assumed that
either 2A = {0} or 3A = {0}.

(b) If 2 A = {0}, calculate (1 + x) 3 , deduce that x 2 = x for all x e A and
conclude by means of Exercise 8.

(c) If 3 A = {0}, calculate {x + y) 3 and (x - y) 3 , show that
x 2 y + xyx + yx 2 = and left multiply by x; deduce that xy - yx = 0.

(d) Let A be a ring such that 3A = {0} and x 3 = x for all x e A; define a
set I and an injective homomorphism of A into (Z/3Z) 1 (same method as in
Exercise 8).

10. Let A be a commutative ring and XI the intersection of its maximal
ideals.

(a) Show that the canonical homomorphism A* -&gt; (A/ll)* is surjective

and that its kernel is 1 + It.

(b) Suppose that the set M of maximal ideals of A is finite and that A* is
finite. Deduce that A is finite (apply Proposition 8 of § 8, no. 10 to A/It).

(c) Deduce that the set of prime numbers is infinite (note that Z* = {1 , — 1}) .

(d) Suppose that A* is finite and that A/m is finite for every maximal ideal
m. Can it be deduced that A is finite, that A is countable?

11. Let P be the set of prime numbers and A the product ring of the fields
Z/pZ, p e P. Let a be the subset of A consisting of the elements (o p ) p6 p such
that a p i= only for a finite number of indices p.

(a) a is an ideal of A.

(b) Let B = A/a. For every integer n &gt; and every b # in B, there exists
one and only one element b' of B such that nb' = b (note that if p e P does

176



EXERCISES

not divide n, multiplication by n in Z//»Z is bijective). Deduce that B contains
a subfield isomorphic to Q,.

12. Let A be a commutative ring and a, b e A. Show that the canonical
image of ab in A/ (a — a 2 b) is an idempotent. Give an example where this
idempotent is distinct from and 1 .

13. Determine the endomorphisms of the ring Z and the ring Z x Z.
More generally, if I and J are finite sets, determine the homomorphisms of the
ring Z 1 into the ring Z J .

14. Let A and B be two rings and/and g two homomorphisms of A into B.
Is the set of # e A such that/(#) = g(x) a subring of A, an ideal of A?

^[15. Let A be a non-commutative ring with no divisors of 0. A is said to
admit a field of left fractions if it is isomorphic to a subring B of a field K such
that every element of K is of the form x~ x y, where x e B, y e B.

(a) Let A' be the set of elements #0 in A. For A to admit a field of left
fractions, it is necessary that the following condition be fulfilled :

(G) for all xeA,x'e A', there exist w e A' and v e A such that ux = vx'.

(b) Suppose conversely that condition (G) is fulfilled. Show that in the set
A x A' the relation R between (#,#') and (y,y r ) which states "for every
ordered pair (u, v) of elements ^0 such that ux' = vy', ux = vy" is an equiva-
lence relation.

Let (x, x'), (y, y') be two elements of A x A', £ and t\ their respective classes
(mod. R). For every ordered pair (u, k')gA x A' such that u'x = uy', show
that the class (mod. R) of (uy, u'y') depends only on the classes \ and tj ; if
it is denoted by £»j, a law of composition is defined on the set K = (A x A')/R.
If K' is the set of elements of K distinct from the class of elements (0, x')
of A x A', K', with the law induced by the above law, is a group.

For every element x e A, the elements (x'x, x'), where x' runs through A',
define an isomorphism of A (with multiplication alone) onto a subring of K.
Identifying A with its image under this isomorphism, the class (mod. R) of
an ordered pair (x, #') e A x A' is identified with the element x' ~ x x.

This being so, if 2; = x' -1 # is an element of K and 1 denotes the unit ele-
ment of K', then £ + 1 denotes the element x'~ 1 (x + x'), which does not
depend on the representation of £ in the form x' ~ l x. We then write £ + = \
and, for&gt;)#0, £ + Y) = -yj( , ]Q~ 1 £+l). Show that the addition and multi-
plication thus defined on K determine on that set a field structure which
extends the ring structure on A; in other words, condition (G) is sufficient for
A to admit a field of left fractions.

16. Let A be a ring in which every non-zero element is cancellable. For
A to admit a field of left fractions (Exercise 15), it is necessary and sufficient
that in A the intersection of two left ideals distinct from never reduce to 0.

177



I ALGEBRAIC STRUCTURES

17. Let (K t ) ieI be a family of fields. For every subset J of I, let e 3 denote the
element of the product K = 1 1 K, whose i-th component is equal to if

i e J and to 1 if i e I — J.

(a) Let x = (x { ) be an element of K and ](x) the set of elements i e I such
that Xi = 0. Show that there exists an invertible element u in K such that

(b) Let o be a left (resp. right) ideal of K distinct from K. Let ft a be the set
of subsets J of I such that e z e a. Show that % a has the following properties:

00 If J g &amp; and J' =&gt; J, then J' e ff 8 .
(h) If Ji&gt; J 2 e 5 Q&gt; then J x n J 2 e &amp;.

(*a) £ $«•
Show that x e a is equivalent to J(x) e $ a (use (a)). Deduce that a is a two-
sided ideal.

(c) A set of subsets of I is called a. filter if it satisfies properties (bj), (b 2 ), (b 3 )
above (*cf. General Topology, I, § 6*) . Show that the mapping a \-&gt; ^ a is a strictly
increasing bijection of the set of ideals of K distinct from K onto the set of
filters of I. *Show that a is maximal if and only if 3= Q is an ultrafilter.,,.

(d) *Let 5 be a non-trivial ultrafilter on the set P of prime numbers, let a

be the corresponding ideal of the ring K = 1 1 Z//&gt;Z and let k = K/a. Show
that A; is a field of characteristic 0.*

"[[18. (a) Let K be a field and a, b two non-permutable elements of K. Show
that

(1) a = (b - {a - \)-H(a - \)){ a - x ba - (a - l)" 1 ^* - l))" 1

(2)a = (l - (a- l)- 1 *- 1 ^- IWia-H-iab - (a - l)"^" 1 ^ - l)*)" 1 .

(b) Let K be a non-commutative field and x an element not belonging to the
centre of K. Show that K is generated by the set of conjugates axa' 1 of at.
(Let K x be the subfield of K generated by the set of conjugates of x. Deduce
from (a) that, if K x ^ K and a e K x and b $ K 1} then necessarily ab — ba.
Deduce a contradiction by considering in K x two non-permutable elements a,
a' and an element b $ K x and noting that ba $ K x .)

(c) Deduce from (b) that if Z is the centre of K and H is a subfield of K
such that ZcHcK and aHa' 1 = H for all a ^ in K, then H = Z or
H = K {Cartan-Brauer-H.ua Theorem).

(d) Deduce from (a) that in a non-commutative field K, the set of commu-
tators aba~ 1 b~ 1 of elements #0 in K generates the field K.

19. Let A be a non-zero pseudo-ring such that, for all a ^ in A and all
b e A, the equation ax + ya = b has solutions consisting of ordered pairs
(x,y) of elements of A; in other words, aA + Aa — A for a ^ in A.

(a) Show that A is the only non-zero two-sided ideal in A.

178



EXERCISES

(b) Show that the relation a # implies a 2 # (note that if a 2 — 0, it
would follow that aAa = {0}).

(c) Show that if ab = and a ^ (resp. b # 0) then 6 = (resp. a =0).
(Note that (ba) 2 = and deduce that bAb = {0}.)

20. Let A be a non-zero pseudo-ring such that there exists a e A for which,
for all b eA, one of the equations ax = b, xa = b admits a solution x e A.
Show that if A has no divisor of other than 0, A admits a unit element.

21. Let A be a non-zero pseudo-ring in which, for all a ^ and all b eA,
one of the equations ax = b, xa = b admits a solution x e A. Show that A
is a field (use Exercises 19 and 20).

§10

1. Let X be the direct limit of a direct system (Xj,^) of sets relative to a
right directed set I. Let F t (resp. F) be the free group constructed on X,
(resp. on X) ; eachy} { extends to a homomorphism &lt;J&gt;yi : F 4 — &gt; F y .

(a) Show that (F ( , § ti ) is a direct system of groups.

(b) Let Sj be the composite mapping X t -&gt; F f -&gt; lim F t . Show that
s y o (j) Jt = E j if j ^ z. Let e be the mapping of X into lim Fj defined by the
£j. Show that e extends to an isomorphism of F onto lim F f (so that F(lim Xj)
can be identified with lim F(Xj)).

(c) State and prove analogous results for free magmas, free monoids, free
commutative groups, free commutative monoids.

2. Show that a direct limit of simple groups is either a simple group or
a group with one element.



179



HISTORICAL NOTE



(Numbers in brackets refer to the bibliography
at the end of this Note.)



There are few notions in Mathematics more primitive than that of a law of
composition : it seems inseparable from the first rudiments of calculations on
natural numbers and measurable quantities. The most ancient documents
that have come down to us on the Mathematics of the Egyptians and Baby-
lonians show that they already had a complete system of rules for calculating
with natural numbers &gt;0, rational numbers &gt;0, lengths and areas; although
the preserved texts deal only with problems in which the given quantities
have explicit numerical values,f they leave us in no doubt concerning the
generality they attributed to the rules employed and show a quite remarkable
technical ability in the manipulation of equations of the first and second degree
([1], p. 179 et seq.). On the other hand there is not the slightest trace of a
concern to justify the rules used nor even of precise definitions of the opera-
tions which occur: the latter as the former arise in a purely empirical manner.
Just such a concern, however, is already very clearly manifest in the works
of the Greeks of the classical age; true, an axiomatic treatment is not found of
the theory of natural numbers (such an axiomatization was only to appear at
the end of the nineteenth century; see the Historical Note to Set Theory, IV) ;
but in Euclid's Elements there are numerous passages giving formal proofs of
rules of calculation which are just as intuitively "obvious" as those of calcula-
tion with integers (for example, the commutativity of the product of two
rational numbers). The most remarkable proofs of this nature are those



t It must not be forgotten that Viete (16th century) was the first to use letters to
denote all the elements (known and unknown) occurring in an algebraic problem.
Until then the only problems solved in treatises on Algebra had numerical co-
efficients; when an author stated a general rule for treating analogous equations,
he did so (as best he could) in ordinary language ; in the absence of an explicit
statement of this type, the way in which the calculations were carried out in the
numerical cases dealt with rendered the possession of such a rule more or less
credible.

180



HISTORICAL NOTE

relating to the theory of magnitudes, the most original creation of Greek Mathe-
matics (equivalent, as is known, to our theory of real numbers &gt; ; see the
Historical Note to General Topology, IV) ; here Euclid considers amongst other
things the product of two ratios of magnitudes and shows that it is independent
of the form of presentation of these ratios (the first example of a "quotient"
of a law of composition by an equivalence relation in the sense of § 1, no.
6) and that they commute ([2], Book V, Prop. 22-23) .|

It must not however be concealed that this progress towards rigour is ac-
companied in Euclid by a stagnation and even in some ways by a retrogression
as far as the technique of algebraic calculations is concerned. The overwhelm-
ing preponderance of Geometry (in the light of which the theory of magnitudes
was obviously conceived) paralyses any independent development of algebraic
notation: the elements entering into the calculations must always be "repre-
sented" geometrically; moreover the two laws of composition which occur are
not defined on the same set (addition of ratios is not defined in a general way
and the product of two lengths is not a length but an area) ; the result is a
lack of flexibility making it almost impracticable to manipulate algebraic
relations of degree greater than the second.

Only with the decline of classical Greek Mathematics does Diophantus
return to the tradition of the "logisticians" or professional calculators, who
had continued to apply such rules as they had inherited from the Egyptians
and Babylonians : no longer encumbering himself with geometric representa-
tions of the "numbers" he considers, he is naturally led to the development of
rules of abstract algebraic calculation; for example, he gives rules which (in
modern language) are equivalent to the formula x m+n = x m x n for small values
(positive or negative) of m and n ([3], vol. I, pp. 8-13); a little later (pp.
12-13), the "rule of signs" is stated, the beginnings of calculating with nega-
tive numbers* ; finally, Diophantus uses for the first time a letter to represent
an unknown in an equation. In contrast, he seems little concerned to attach
a general significance to the methods he applies for the solution of his prob-
lems; as for the axiomatic conception of laws of composition as begun by
Euclid, this appears foreign to Diophantus' thought as to that of his immediate
successors; it only reappears in Algebra at the beginning of the 19th century.

There were first needed, during the intervening centuries, on the one hand
the development of a system of algebraic notation adequate for the expression



| Euclid gives at this point, it is true, no formal definition of the product of two
ratios and the one which is found a little later on in the Elements (Book VI, Defini-
tion 5) is considered to be interpolated: he has of course a perfectly clear con-
ception of this operation and its properties.

% It seems that Diophantus was not acquainted with negative numbers; this rule
can therefore only be interpreted as relating to the calculus of polynomials and
allowing the "expansion" of such products as (a — b){c — d).

181



HISTORICAL NOTE

of abstract laws and on the other a broadening of the notion of "number"
sufficient to give it, through the observation of a wide enough variety of special
cases, a general conception. For this purpose, the axiomatic theory of ratios
of magnitudes created by the Greeks was insufficient, for it did no more than
make precise the intuitive concept of a real number &gt; and the operations
on these numbers, which were already known to the Babylonians in a more
confused form; now "numbers" would be considered of which the Greeks had
had no concept and which to begin with had no sensible "representation":
on the one hand, zero and negative numbers which appeared in the High
Middle Ages in Hindu Mathematics; on the other, imaginary numbers, the
creation of Italian algebraists of the 16th century.

With the exception of zero, introduced first as a separating sign before being
considered as a number (see the Historical Note to Set Theory, III), the common
character of these extensions is that (at least to begin with) they were purely
"formal". By this it must be understood that the new "numbers" appeared
first of all as the result of operations applied to situations where, keeping to
their strict definition, they had no meaning (for example, the difference a — b
of two natural numbers when a &lt; b) : whence the names "false", "Active",
"absurd", "impossible", "imaginary", etc., numbers attributed to them. For
the Greeks of the Classical Period, enamoured above all of clear thought, such
extensions were inconceivable; they could only arise with calculators more
disposed than were the Greeks to display a somewhat mystic faith in the power
of their methods ("the generality of Analysis" as the 18th century would say)
and to allow themselves to be carried along by the mechanics of their calcula-
tions without investigating whether each step was well founded; a confidence
moreover usually justified a posteriori, by the exact results to which the exten-
sion led, with these new mathematical entities, of rules of calculation uniquely
valid, in all rigour, for the numbers which were already known. This explains
how little by little these generalizations of the concept of number, which at
first occurred only as intermediaries in a sequence of operations whose starting
and finishing points were genuine "numbers", came to be considered for
their own sakes (independent of any application to concrete calculations) ;
once this step had been taken, more or less tangible interpretations were
sought, new objects which thus acquired the right to exist in Mathematics.f

On this subject, the Hindus were already aware of the interpretation to be
given to negative numbers in certain cases (a debt in a commercial problem,
for example). In the following centuries, as the methods and results of Greek



f This search was merely a transitory stage in the evolution of the concepts in
question ; from the middle of the 1 9th century there has been a return, this time fully
deliberate, to a formal conception of the various extensions of the notion of number,
a conception which has finally become integrated in the "formalistic" and axiomatic
point of view which dominates the whole of modern mathematics.

182



HISTORICAL NOTE

and Hindu mathematics spread to the West (via the Arabs), the manipulation
of these numbers became more familiar and they took on other "representa-
tions" of a geometric or kinematic character. With the progressive improve-
ment in algebraic notation, this was the only notable progress in Algebra
during the close of the Middle Ages.

At the beginning of the 16th century, Algebra took on a new impulse thanks
to the discovery by mathematicians of the Italian school of the solution "by
radicals" of equations of the 3rd and then of the 4th degree (of which we shall
speak in more detail in the Historical Note to Algebra, V) ; it is at this point
that, in spite of their aversion, they felt compelled to introduce into their
calculations imaginary numbers; moreover, little by little confidence is born
in the calculus of these "impossible" numbers, as in that of negative numbers,
even though no "representation" of them was conceived for more than two
centuries.

On the other hand, algebraic notation was decisively perfected by Viete
and Descartes; from the latter onwards, algebraic notation is more or less
that which we use today.

From the middle of the 17th to the end of the 18th century, it seems that
the vast horizons opened by the creation of Infinitesimal Calculus resulted in
something of a neglect of Algebra in general and especially of mathematical
reflection on laws of composition and on the nature of real and complex num-
bers.! Thus the composition of forces and the composition of velocities, well
known in Mechanics from the end of the 1 7th century, had no repercussions
in Algebra, even though they already contained the germ of vector cal-
culus. In fact it was necessary to await the movement of ideas which, about
1800, led to the geometric representation of complex numbers (see the His-
torical Note to General Topology, VIII) to see addition of vectors used in Pure
Mathematics. %

It was round about the same time that for the first time in Algebra the notion
of law of composition was extended in two different directions to elements
which have only distant analogies with "numbers" (in the broadest sense of
the word up till then). The first of these extensions is due to C. F. Gauss
occasioned by his arithmetical researches on quadratic forms ax 2 + bxy + cy 2
with integer coefficients. Lagrange had defined on the set of forms with the

f The attempts of Leibniz should be excepted, on the one hand to give an
algebraic form to the arguments of formal logic, on the other to found a "geometric
calculus" operating directly on geometric objects without using coordinates ([4],
vol. V, p. 141). But these attempts remained as sketches and found no echo in his
contemporaries; they were only to be taken up again during the 19th century (see
below) .

J This operation was moreover introduced without reference to Mechanics; the
connection between the two theories was only explicidy recognized by the founders
of Vector Calculus in the second quarter of the 19th century.

183



HISTORICAL NOTE

same discriminant an equivalence relationf and had on the other hand proved
an identity which provided this set with a commutative law of composition
(not everywhere defined) ; starting from these results, Gauss showed that this
law is compatible (in the sense of § 1, no. 6) with a refined form of the above
equivalence relation ([5], vol. I, p. 272): "This shows", he then says, "what
must be understood by the composite class of two or several classes". He then proceeds
to study the "quotient" law, establishes essentially that it is (in modern
language) a commutative group law and does so with arguments whose gene-
rality for the most part goes far beyond the special case considered by Gauss
(for example, the argument by which he proves the uniqueness of the inverse
element is identical with the one we have given for an arbitrary law of com-
position in §2, no 3 (ibid., p. 273)). Nor does he stop there: returning a
little later to this question, he recognizes the analogy between composition
of classes and multiplication of integers modulo a prime numberj (ibid.,
p. 371), but proves also that the group of classes of quadratic forms of given
discriminant is not always a cyclic group; the indications he gives on this
subject show clearly that he had recognized, at any rate in this particular
case, the general structure of finite Abelian groups, which we shall study in
Chapter VII ([5], vol. I, p. 374 and vol. II, p. 266).

The other series of research of which we wish to speak also ended in the
concept of a group and its definitive introduction into Mathematics: this
is the "theory of substitutions", the development of the ideas of Lagrange,
Vandermonde and Gauss on the solution of algebraic equations. We do not
give here the detailed history of this subject (see the Historical Note to
Algebra, V); we must refer to the definition by Ruffini and then Cauchy
([6], (2), vol. I, p. 64) of the "product" of two permutations of a finite set,§



f Two forms are equivalent when one of them transforms into the other by a
"change of variables" x' = ax + $y, y' = yx + 8y, where a, (3, y, 8 are integers
such that a.8 — (3y = 1.

J It is quite remarkable that Gauss writes composition of classes of quadratic
forms additively, in spite of the analogy which he himself points out and in spite of
the fact that Lagrange's identity, which defines the composition of two forms, much
more naturally suggests multiplicative notation (to which moreover all Gauss's
successors returned). This indifference in notational matters must further bear
witness to the generality at which Gauss had certainly arrived in his concept of
laws of composition. Moreover he did not restrict his attention to commutative
laws, as is seen from a fragment not published in his lifetime but dating from the
years 1819-1820, where he gives, more than twenty years before Hamilton, the
formulae for multiplication of quaternions ([5], vol. VIII, p. 357).

§ The notion of composite function was of course known much earlier, at any rate
for functions of real or complex variables ; but the algebraic aspect of this law of
composition and the relation with the product of two permutations only came to
light in the works of Abel ([7], vol. I, p. 478) and Galois.

184



HISTORICAL NOTE

and the first notions concerning finite permutation groups: transitivity,
primitivity, identity element, permutable elements, etc. But these first results
remain, as a whole, quite superficial and Evariste Galois must be considered
as the true initiator of the theory: having, in his memorable work [8], reduced
the study of algebraic equations to that of permutation groups associated with
them, he took the study of the latter considerably deeper, both with regard to
the general properties of groups (Galois was the first to define the notion of
normal subgroup and to recognize its importance) and with regard to the
determination of groups with particular properties (where the results he ob-
tained are still today considered to be amongst the most subtle in the theory).
The first idea of the "linear representation of groups" also goes back to Gal-
oisf and this fact shows clearly that he possessed the notion of isomorphism of
two group structures, independently of their "realizations".

However, if the ingenious methods of Gauss and Galois incontestably led
them to a very broad conception of the notion of law of composition, they
did not develop their ideas particularly on this point and their works had no
immediate effect on the evolution of Abstract Algebra. J The clearest progress
towards abstraction was made in a third direction : after reflecting on the nature
of imaginary numbers (whose geometric representation had brought about,
at the beginning of the 19th century, a considerable number of works),
algebraists of the English school were the first, between 1830 and 1850, to
isolate the abstract notion of law of composition and immediately they
broadened the field of Algebra by applying this notion to a host of new mathe-
matical entities : the algebra of Logic with Boole (see the Historical Note to
Set Theory, IV), vectors and quaternions with Hamilton, general hypercomplex
systems, matrices and non-associative laws with Cayley ([10], vol. I, pp. 127
and 301 and vol. II, pp. 185 and 475). A parallel evolution was pursued inde-
pendently on the Continent, notably in Vector Calculus (Mobius, Bellavitis),
Linear Algebra and hypercomplex systems (Grassmann), of which we shall
speak in more detail in the Historical Note to Algebra, III.§

From all this ferment of original and fertile ideas which revitalized Algebra
in the first half of the 19th century the latter emerged thoroughly renewed.
Previously methods and results had gravitated round the central problem of
the solution of algebraic equations (or Diophantine equations in the Theory



t Here it is that Galois, by a daring extension of the "formalism" which had led
to complex numbers, considers "imaginary roots" of a congruence modulo a prime
number and thus discovers finite fields, which we shall study in Algebra, V.

% Moreover those of Galois remained unknown until 1846 and those of Gauss
only exercised a direct influence on the Theory of Numbers.

§ The principal theories developed during this period are to be found in a re-
markable contemporary exposition of H. Hankel [11], where the abstract notion of
law of composition is conceived and presented with perfect clarity.

185



HISTORICAL NOTE

of Numbers) : "Algebra", said Serret in the Introduction to his Course of
Higher Algebra [12], "is, properly speaking, the Analysis of equations" . After 1850,
if the treatises on Algebra still gave preeminence to the theory of equations for
some time to come, new research works were no longer dominated by the con-
cern for immediate applications to the solution of numerical equations but
were oriented more and more towards what today is considered to be the
essential problem of Algebra, the study of algebraic structures for their own
sake.

These works fall quite neatly into three main currents which extend respec-
tively the three movements of ideas which we have analysed above and pursue
parallel courses without noticeably influencing one another until the last
years of the 19th century.f

The first of these arose out of the work of the German school of the 19th
century (Dirichlet, Kummer, Kronecker, Dedekind, Hilbert) in building up
the theory of algebraic numbers, issuing out of the work of Gauss who was
responsible for the first study of this type, that of the numbers a + bi {a and
b rational). We shall not follow the evolution of this theory here (see the
Historical Note to Commutative Algebra, VII) : we need only mention, for our
purposes, the abstract algebraic notions which arose here. Right from the
first successors of Gauss, the idea of afield (of algebraic numbers) is fundamental
to all the works on this subject (as also to the works of Abel and Galois on
algebraic equations) ; its field of application was enlarged when Dedekind
and Weber [13] modelled the theory of algebraic functions of one variable on
that of algebraic numbers. Dedekind [14] was also responsible for the notion
of an ideal which provides a new example of a law of composition between
sets of elements; he and Kronecker were responsible for the more and more
important role played by commutative groups and modules in the theory of
algebraic fields; we shall return to this in the Historical Notes to Algebra, III,
V and VII.

We shall also refer in the Historical Notes to Algebra, III and VIII to the
development of Linear Algebra and hypercomplex systems which was pursued
without introducing any new algebraic notion during the end of the 19th and
the beginning of the 20th century, in England (Sylvester, W. Clifford) and
America (B. and C. S. Pierce, Dickson, Wedderburn) following the path
traced by Hamilton and Cayley, in Germany (Weierstrass, Dedekind, Fro-
benius, Molien) and in France (Laguerre, E. Cartan) independently of the
Anglo-Saxons and using quite different methods.



f We choose here to leave aside all consideration of the development, during this
period, of algebraic geometry and the theory of invariants which is closely related
to it; these two theories developed following their own methods oriented towards
Analysis rather than Algebra and it is only recently that they have found their place
in the vast edifice of Modern Algebra.

186



HISTORICAL NOTE

As far as group theory is concerned, this developed first of all mainly as the
theory of finite permutation groups, following the publication of the works
of Galois and their diffusion through the works of Serret [12] and above all
the great "Traite des Substitutions" of C. Jordan [15]. The latter there de-
veloped, greatly improving them, the works of his predecessors on the par-
ticular properties of permutation groups (transitivity, primitivity, etc.), ob-
taining results most of which have not been superseded since; he made an
equally profound study of a very important particular class of groups, linear
groups and their subgroups; moreover, he it was who introduced the funda-
mental notion of a homomorphism of one group into another and also (a
little later) that of quotient group and who proved a part of the theorem known
as the "Jordan-Holder Theorem"-! Finally Jordan was the first to study
infinite groups [16], which S. Lie on the one hand and F. Klein and H. Poin-
care on the other were to develop considerably in two different directions
several years later.

In the meantime, what is essential in a group, that is its law of composition
and not the nature of the objects which constitute the group, slowly come to be
realized (see for example [10], vol. II, pp. 123 and 131 and [14], vol. Ill,
p. 439). However, even the research works on finite abstract groups had for a
long time been conceived as the study of permutation groups and only around
1880 was the independent theory of finite groups beginning to develop con-
sciously. We cannot pursue further the history of this theory which is only
touched on very superficially in this Treatise; we shall just mention two of the
tools which are still today among the most used in the study of finite groups and
which both go back to the 19th century: the Sylow theorems J on /&gt;-groups
which date from 1872 [17] and the theory of characters created in the last
years of the century by Frobenius [19]. We refer the reader who wishes to go
deeply into the theory of finite groups and the many difficult problems it
raises, to the monographs of Burnside [20], Speiser [23], Zassenhaus [24] and
Gorenstein [27].

Around 1880 too the systematic study of group presentations was begun;
previously only presentations of particular groups had been encountered,
for example the alternating group 2l 5 in a work of Hamilton [9 bis] or the
monodromy groups of linear differential equations and Riemann surfaces
(Schwarz, Klein, Schlafli). W. Dyck was the first [18] to define (without
giving it a name) the free group generated by a finite number of generators,



t Jordan had only established the invariance (up to order) of the orders of the
quotient groups of a "Jordan-Holder series" for a finite group; it was O. Holder
who showed that the quotient groups themselves are (up to order) independent of
the series considered.

t The existence of a subgroup of order p n in a group whose order is divisible by
p n is mentioned without proof in the papers of Galois [8],

187



BIBLIOGRAPHY

but he was less interested in it for its own sake than as a "universal" object
allowing a precise definition of a group given "by generators and relations".
Developing an idea first set forth by Cayley and visibly influenced on the
other hand by the works of Riemann's school mentioned above, Dyck de-
scribed an interpretation of a group of given presentation, where each generator
is represented by a product of two inversions with respect to tangent or inter-
secting circles (see also Burnside [20], Chapter XVIII). A little later, after
the development of the theory of automorphic functions by Poincar6 and his
successors, then the introduction by Poincare of the tools of Algebraic Topology,
the first studies of the fundamental group would be on an equal footing with
those of group presentations (Dehn, Tietze), the two theories lending one
another mutual support. Moreover it was a topologist, J. Nielsen, who in 1924
introduced the term free group in the first deep study of its properties [21],
almost immediately afterwards E. Artin (always with reference to questions
in topology) introduced the notion of the free product of groups and 0.
Schreier defined more generally the free product with amalgamated sub-
groups [22] (cf. I, § 7, no. 3, Exercise 20). Here again we cannot go into the
history of the later developments in this direction, referring the reader to the
work [26] for more details.

There is no further room to speak of the extraordinary success, since the
end of the 19th century, of the idea of group (and that of invariant which is
intimately related with it) in Analysis, Geometry, Mechanics and Theoretical
Physics. An analogous invasion by this notion and the algebraic notions related
to it (groups with operators, rings, ideals, modules) into parts of Algebra
which until then seemed quite unrelated is the distinguishing mark of the last
period of evolution which we retrace here and which ended with the synthesis
of the three branches which we have followed above. This unification is above
all the work of the German school of the years 1900-1930: begun by Dede-
kind and Hilbert in the last years of the 19th century, the work of axiomatiza-
tion of Algebra was vigorously pursued by E. Steinitz, then, starting in 1920,
under the impulse of E. Artin, E. Noether and the algebraists of their school
(Hasse, Krull, O. Schreier, van der Waerden). The treatise by van der
Waerden [25], published in 1930, brought together these works for the first
time in a single exposition, opening the way and serving as a guide to many
research works in Algebra during more than twenty years.

Bibliography

1. O. Neugebauer, Vorlesungen iiber Geschichte der antiken Mathematik, Vol. I:

Vorgriechische Mathematik, Berlin (Springer), 1934.

2. Euclidis Elementa, 5 vols., ed. J. L. Heiberg, Lipsiae (Teubner), 1883-88.
2 bis. T. L. Heath, The thirteen books of Euclid's Elements . . ., 3 vols., Cam-
bridge, 1908.

188



BIBLIOGRAPHY

3. Diophanti Alexandrini Opera Omnia . . ., 2 vols., ed. P. Tannery, Lipsiae

(Teubner), 1893-95.
3 bis. Diophante d'Alexandrie, trad. P. Ver Eecke, Bruges (Desclee-de Brouwer),
1926.

4. G. W. Leibniz, Mathematische Schriften, ed. C. I. Gerhardt, vol. V, Halle

(Schmidt), 1858.

5. G. F. Gauss, Werke, vols. I (Gottingen, 1870), II (ibid., 1863) and VIII

(ibid., 1900).

6. A. L. Cauchy, Oeuvres completes (2), vol. I, Paris (Gauthier-Villars),

1905.

7. N. H. Abel, Oeuvres, 2 vol., ed. Sylow and Lie, Christiania, 1881.

8. E. Galois, Ecrits et memoires mathematiques, ed. R. Bourgne and J. Y. Azra,

Paris (Gauthier-Villars), 1962.

9. W. R. Hamilton, Lectures on Quaternions, Dublin, 1853.

9 bis. W. R. Hamilton, Memorandum respecting a new system of roots of
unity, Phil. Mag. (4), 12 (1856), p. 446.

10. A. Gayley, Collected mathematical papers, vols. I and II, Cambridge (Univer-

sity Press), 1889.

11. H. Hankel, Vorlesungen iiber die complexen Zahlen und ihre Functionen, 1st

part: Theorie der complexen Zahlensysteme, Leipzig (Voss), 1867.

12. J. A. Serret, Cours d'Algebre superieure, 3rd ed., Paris (Gauthier-Villars),

1866.

13. R. Dedekind and H. Weber, Theorie der algebraischen Funktionen einer

Veranderlichen, Crelle's J., 92 (1882), pp. 181-290.

14. R. Dedekind, Gesammelte mathematische Werke, 3 vols., Braunschweig

(Vieweg), 1932.

15. C. Jordan, Traite des substitutions et des equations algebriques, Paris (Gauthier-

Villars), 1870 (reprinted, Paris (A. Blanchard), 1957).

16. C. Jordan, Memoire sur les groups des mouvements, Ann. di Mat. (2),

2 (1868), pp. 167-215 and 322-345 ( = Oeuvres, vol. IV, pp. 231-302,
Paris (Gauthier-Villars), 1964).

1 7. L. Sylow, Theoremes sur les groups de substitutions, Math. Ann., 5 (1872),

pp. 584-594.

18. W. Dyck, Gruppentheoretische Studien, Math. Ann., 20 (1882), pp.

1-44.

19. G. Frobenius, Uber Gruppencharaktere, Berliner Sitzungsber., 1896,

pp. 985-1021 (= Gesammelte Abhandlungen, ed. J. P. Serre, Berlin-
Heidelberg-New York (Springer), vol. Ill (1968), pp. 1-37).

20. W. Burnside, Theory of groups of finite order, 2nd ed., Cambridge, 1911.

21. J. Nielsen, Die Isomorphismengruppen der freien Gruppen, Math. Ann.,

91 (1924), pp. 169-209.

22. O. Schreier, Die Untergruppen der freien Gruppe, Abh. Hamb., 5 (1927),

pp. 161-185.

189



BIBLIOGRAPHY

23. A. Speiser, Theorie der Gruppen von endlicher Ordnung, 3rd ed., Berlin

(Springer), 1937.

24. H. Zassenhaus, Lehrbuch der Gruppentheorie, vol. I, Leipzig-Berlin (Teub-

ner), 1937.

25. B. L. van der Waerden, Moderne Algebra, 2nd ed., vol. I, Berlin (Springer),

1937; vol. II (ibid.), 1940.

26. W. Magnus, A. Karrass and D. Solitar, Combinatorial group theory,

New York (Interscience), 1966.

27. D. Gorenstein, Finite groups, New York (Harper and Row), 1968.



190



CHAPTER II



Linear Algebra



This chapter is essentially devoted to the study of a particular type of com-
mutative groups with operators (I, § 4, no. 2) called modules. Certain properties
stated in §§ 1 and 2 for modules extend to all commutative groups with
operators; these will be indicated as they occur. Moreover it will be seen
in Chapter III, § 2, no. 6 that the study of a commutative group with operators
is always equivalent to that of a module suitably associated with the group
with operators in question.



§ 1. MODULES

1. MODULES; VECTOR SPACES; LINEAR COMBINATIONS

Definition 1. Given a ring A, a left module over A (or left A-module) is a set E
with an algebraic structure defined by giving:

(1) a commutative group law on E (written additively in what follows) ;

(2) a law of action (a, x) h-&gt; a T x, whose domain of operators is the ring A and
which satisfies the following axioms:

(Mj) a T (* + y) = (a T x) + (a T y) for all a e A, x e E, y e E;
(M n ) (a + p) T x = (a T *) + (p T x) for all a e A, p e A, x e E;
(M m ) a T (P T x) = (ap) T xfor all a e A, (3 e A, x e E;
(Mpy) 1t* = xfor all xeE.

Axiom (Mj) means that the external law of a left A-module E is distribu-
tive with respect to addition on E; a module is thus a commutative group
with operators.

If in Definition 1, axiom (M ni ) is replaced by

(M ra ) aT(pTx) = (pa) T xfor all a e A, p e A, x e E,

191



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

E with the algebraic structure thus defined is a right module over A or a right
A-module.

When speaking of A-modules (left or right), the elements of the ring A
are often called scalars.

Usually the external law of composition of a left A-module (resp. right
A-module) is written multiplicatively, with the operator written on the left
(resp. right) ; condition (M ni ) is then written a((3x) = (ap)#, condition (Mj n )
is written (#P)a = x($a).

If A denotes the opposite ring to A (I, §8, no. 3), every right module E
over the ring A is a left module over the ring A . It follows that an exposition
can be given of the properties of modules whilst systematically confining atten-
tion either to left modules or to right modules; in §§ 1 and 2 we shall in general
give this exposition for left modules and when we speak of a module (without
specifying which type) we shall mean a left module whose external law will
be written multiplicatively. When the ring A is commutative the notions of right
module and left module with respect to A are identical.

For all a e A, the mapping x *-&gt; ccx of an A-module E into itself is called
the homothety of ratio a of E (I, § 4, no. 2) ; by (M x ) a homothety is an endo-
morphism of the commutative group structure {without operators) on E, but
not in general of the module structure on E (I, § 4, no. 2; cf. II, § 1, no. 2
and no. 13). Hence aO = and cn{—x) = — (a#) ; if a is an invertible element of
A, the homothety x h-&gt; chx is an automorphism of the commutative group structure
(without operators) on E, for the relation y = a.x implies by virtue of (M IV ),
x = a -1 (owr) = a _1 y.

Similarly, by virtue of (M n ), for all xeE, the mapping a ■-»• cue is a homo-
morphism of the additive group A into the commutative group (without
operators) E; hence Ox = and ( — &lt;x)# = — (our); moreover, by (M IV ), for
every integer n e Z, n.x = (n.l)x.

When the ring A consists only of the element 0, every A-module E con-
sists only of the element 0, for then 1 = in A, whence, for all xeE,
x = 1 .* = 0.# = 0.

Examples. (1) Let &lt;{&gt; be a homomorphism of a ring A into a ring B; the map-
ping (a, x) i-&gt; §(a)x (resp. {a, x) t-&gt; x$(a)) of A x B into B defines on B a left
(resp. right) A-module structure. In particular if &lt;j&gt; is taken to be the identity
mapping on A, a canonical left (resp. right) A-module structure is obtained
on A; to avoid confusion, the set A with this structure is denoted by A s (resp.

A*).

(2) On a commutative group G (written additively) the group with opera-
tors structure defined by the external law (n, x) &lt;-^-n.x (I, §3, no. 1) is a
module structure over the ring Z of rational integers.

(3) Let E be a commutative group written additively, £ the endomorphism

192



modules; vector spaces; linear combinations §1.1

ring of E (I, § 8, no. 3 : recall that the product fg of two endomorphisms is
by definition the composite endomorphism f°g). The external law
(f&gt; x ) ^/GO between operators fe £ and elements xeE defines on E a
canonical left &lt;^-module structure.

Consider now a ring A and suppose there is given on E a left (resp. right)
A-module structure; for all &lt;x£A, the homothety h^ixi-xvc (resp. x*-*-xa)
belongs to S\ the mapping &lt;f&gt; : a •-&gt; A a is a homomorphism of the ring A (resp.
the opposite ring A ) into the ring &lt;f and by definition cue = (&lt;j&gt;(oc))(#) (resp.
xv. = (&lt;K a ))(*))- Conversely, giving a ring homomorphism &lt;J&gt;:A-&gt;^ (resp.
&lt;j&gt;:A° -&gt; S) defines a left (resp. right) A-module structure on E by the above
formulae. In other words, being given a left (resp. right) A-module structure
on an additive group E with additive law the given group law is equivalent to
being given a ring homomorphism A -*■ &amp; (resp. A -&gt; #).

Definition 2. A left (resp. right) vector space over afield K is a left (resp. right)
'K.-module.

The elements of a vector space are sometimes called vectors.

Examples. (4) A field is both a left and a right vector space with respect
to any of its subfields.

*(5) The real number space of three dimensions R 3 is a vector space
with respect to the field of real numbers R, the product tx of a real number
t and a point x with coordinates x lf x 2 , x 3 being the point with coordinates
txi, tx 2 , tx 3 . Similarly, the set of real-valued functions defined on an arbi-
trary set F is a vector space with respect to R, the product tf of a real num-
ber t and a function /being the real- valued function xi-»- */"(*)•*

For two families (#i)i e i, (y t )tei °f elements of an A-module E of finite sup-
port (I, § 2, no. 1), the following equations hold:

(i) 2(^ + ^0 = 2^ + 2^

(2) a. 2* x. = 2- (oar.) for all a e A;

v ' iel iel v '

the equations are immediately reduced to the analogous equations for finite
sums by considering a finite subset H of I containing the supports of (# t ) and

Definition 3. An element x of an A-module E is said to be a linear combination with
coefficients in A of a family (a t ) ie i of elements ofE if there exists a family (\) ie i°f

elements of A, of finite support, such that x = Z, X t a t .

In general there are several distinct families (X t ) satisfying this condition
(cf.no. 11).

193



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Note that is the only linear combination of the empty family of elements
of E (by the convention of I, § 2, no. 1).

2. LINEAR MAPPINGS

Definition 4. Let E and F be two {left) modules with respect to the same ring A.
A linear mapping (or A-linear mapping, or homomorphism, or A-homomorphism)
ofE into F is any mapping «:E -» F such that:

(3) «(* + y) = u(x) + u(y) for x eE,y eE;

(4G) u(k.x) = X.«(#) forleA, xeE.

If E and F are two ngta A-modules, a linear mapping m : E -&gt; F is a mapping
satisfying (3) and

(4D) «(x.X) = w(#).X forXeA, # e E.

Remark. When E and F are two commutative groups considered as modules
over the ring Z (no. 1), every homomorphism u of the group E (without
operators) into the group F (without operators) is also a linear mapping of
E into F, since for n an integer &gt; 0, the relation u(n .x) = n. u(x) follows from
u ( x + y) — u ( x ) + u iy) by induction on n and for n = — m &lt; 0,
u(n.x) = u( — (m.x)) = — u(m.x) — —(m.u(x)) = n.u(x).

Examples. (1) Let E be an A-module and a an element of E; the mapping
X »-&gt; Xa of the A-module A s into E is a linear mapping a such that a (l) = a.
*(2) Let I be an open interval of the real line R, E the vector space of
differentiate real-valued functions on I and F the vector space of all real-
valued functions defined on I. The mapping x i-&gt; x' which associates
with every differentiable function x its derivative is a linear mapping from
E to F.*

Note that a homothety x^wonan A-module E is not necessarily a linear
mapping: in other words, the relation &lt;x(X#) = X(a#) does not necessarily hold
for all X e A and x e E. This relation is however true when a belongs to the
centre of A; x i-&gt; ax is then called a central homothety (cf. no. 13).

If w.E -&gt; F is a linear mapping, then, for every family (x l ) l 6l of elements
of E and every family (X t ) t6l of elements of A such that the support of the
family (X^)^! is finite,

(5) u( Z, X t * t ) = 2, \u(x t )

as follows immediately from (3) and (4G) by induction on the cardinal of
the support of the family (X t x t ).

Proposition 1 . Let E, F, G be three A-modules, u a linear mapping of E into F
and v a linear mapping of F into G. Then the composite mapping v o u is linear.

194



LINEAR MAPPINGS § 1.2

Proposition 2. Let E, F be two A-modules.

(1) i/*u:E — &gt; F and v:F — &gt; E are too /in^zr mappings such that v ° u is the iden-
tity mapping on E a/w/ u° v is the identity mapping on F, u is an isomorphism of E
onto F anrf v is the inverse isomorphism.

(2) Every bijective linear mapping u:E-&gt;F is an isomorphism o/"E onto F.

These propositions follow immediately from Definition 4.

Propositions 1 and 2 show that linear mappings can be taken as the morph-
isms for the species of A-module structures (Set Theory, IV, §2, no. 1); we
shall henceforth always assume that this choice of morphisms has been made.

Given two left (resp. right) A-modules E and F, let Hom(E, F) or
Hom A (E, F) denote the set of linear mappings of E into F.

The set Hom(E, F) is a commutative ring, a subgroup of the product commu-
tative group F E of all mappings of E into F (I, § 4, no. 8) ; recall that for two
elements u, v of F E and for all x e E,

(u + v)(x) = u(x) + v(x), (-«)(*) = — "(*)

whence it follows immediately that, if u and v are linear, so are u + v and — u.
If G is a third left (resp. right) A-module, f,fi,f 2 elements of Hom(E, F) and
Si £i&gt; Sz elements of Hom(F, G), the following relations are immediately
verified :

(6) g o C/i +/ a ) = S°fi + S °/a

(7) (Si + S2) °f =Si°f+ S2 °f

(8) *•(-/)«(-*)•/« -(*■/).

In particular, the law of composition (f,g) *-+f°g on Hom(E, E) defines
with the above additive group structure a ring structure on Hom(E, E) whose
unit element, denoted by 1 E or Id E , is the identity mapping on E; the linear
mappings of E into itself are also called endomorphisms of the A-module E and
the ring Hom(E, E) is also denoted by End(E) or End A (E). The automorphisms
of the A-module E are just the invertible elements of End (E) (Proposition 2);
they form a multiplicative group, denoted by Aut(E) or GL(E) which is also
called the linear group relative to E.

It follows from (6) and (7) that, for two A-modules E, F, Hom(E, F) has
the canonical structure of a left module over the ring Hom(F, F) and of a right
module over Hom(E, E).

Let E, F, E', F' be four (left) A-modules, «:E' -&gt; E and o:F -&gt; F' A-linear
mappings. If every element fe Hom(E, F) is associated with the element
v of o u g Hom(E', F'), a mapping

Hom(E, F) -&gt; Hom(E', F)

195



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

is defined, which is Z-linear and which is denoted by Hom(a, v) or Hom A («, v).
If u, u u u 2 belong to Hom(E', E) and v, v 1} v 2 to Hom(F, F') 5 then

rHom(M! + u 2 , v) = Hom(a b v) + Hom(« 2) v)
^ ' \Hom(a, v x + v 2 ) = Hom(a, v x ) + Hom(w, v 2 )

Let E", F" be two A-modules, u':E"-&gt; E' and v':F' -^&gt; F" linear mappings.
Then

(10) Hom(a o u', v' ° v) = Hom(a', v') o Hom(a, o).

If m is an isomorphism of E' onto E and v an isomorphism of F onto F',
Hom(a, v) is an isomorphism of Hom(E, F) onto Hom(E', F') whose inverse
isomorphism is Hom(a _1 , v' 1 ) by (10).

If h (resp. k) is an endomorphism of E (resp. F), Horn (A, 1 F ) (resp.
Hom(l E , k)) is just the homothety with ratio h (resp. k) for the right (resp.
left) module structure on the ring End(E) (resp. End(F)) defined above.

3. SUBMODULES; QUOTIENT MODULES

Let E be an A-module and M a subset of E; for the A-module structure on E
to induce an A-module structure on M, it is necessary and sufficient that
M be a stable subgroup of E (I, § 4, no. 3), for if this is so, the structure of a
group with operators induced on M obviously satisfies axioms (M n ), (M m )
and (M IV ) ; then M with this structure (or, by an abuse of language, the set
M itself) is called a submodule of E; the canonical injection M -^ E is a linear
mapping. When E is a vector space, its submodules are called vector subspaces
(or simply subspaces if no confusion can arise).

Examples. (1) In any module E the set consisting of is a submodule (the
zero submodule, often denoted by 0, by an abuse of notation).

(2) Let A be a ring. The submodules of A s (resp. A d ) are just the left ideals
(resp. right ideals) of the ring A.

(3) Let E be an A-module, x an element of E and a a left ideal of A. The
set of elements ax, where a runs through a, is a submodule of E, denoted by
ax.

(4) In a commutative group G considered as a Z-module (no. 1), every sub-
group of G is also a submodule.

*(5) Let I be an open interval of the real line R; the set C of real-valued
functions defined and continuous on I is a vector subspace of the vector
space R 1 of all real-valued functions defined on I. Similarly, the set D of
differentiable functions on I is a vector subspace of G. „,

Let E be an A-module. Every equivalence relation compatible (I, § 1, no. 6)
with the module structure on E is of the form x - yeM, where M is a stable

196



EXACT SEQUENCES § 1.4

subgroup of E (I, § 4, no. 4), that is a submodule of E. It is immediately verified
that the structure of a group with operators on the quotient group E/M
(I, § 4, no. 4) is an A-module structure, under which the canonical mapping
E — &gt; E/M is linear; with this structure, E/M is called the quotient module of E
by the submodule M. A quotient module of a vector space E is called a
quotient vector space (or simply quotient space) of E.

Example (6). Every left ideal o in a ring A defines a quotient module AJa
of the left A-module A s ; by an abuse of notation, this quotient module is
often denoted by A/a.

Let E, F be two A-modules. It follows from the general properties of groups
with operators (I, § 4, no. 5) (or directly from the definitions) that if u : E -&gt; F
is a linear mapping, the image under u of any submodule of E is a submodule
of F and the inverse image under u of any submodule of F is a submodule of

E. In particular, the kernel N = u (0) is a submodule of E and the image w(E)
of E under u is a submodule of F (I, § 4, no. 6, Proposition 7) ; by an abuse of
language u(E) is called the image qfu. The quotient module E/N is also called
the coimage of u and the quotient module F/m(E) the cokernel of m. In the canonical
decomposition of u (I, § 4, no. 5)

(11) u:E -?-&gt; E/N -A- «(E) -U F

v is an isomorphism of the coimage of u onto the image of u (no. 2, Proposition 2).
For u to be infective, it is necessary and sufficient that its kernel be zero; for u to
be surjective, it is necessary and sufficient that its cokernel be zero.

The kernel, image, coimage and cokernel of u are denoted respectively by
Ker u, Im u, Coim u, Coker u.

Remark. Let M be a submodule of an A-module E and &lt;j&gt; : E -» E/M the
canonical homomorphism. For an A-linear mapping «:E— &gt;F to be of the
form v o &lt;j&gt;, where v is a linear mapping of E/M into F, it is necessary and
sufficient that M c: Ker(w) ; for, if this condition holds, the relation x — y eM.
implies u(x) = u(y), hence u is compatible with this equivalence relation and
clearly the mapping o:E/M -&gt; F derived from u by taking quotients is linear.



4. EXACT SEQUENCES

Definition 5. Let F, G, H be three A-modules; let f be a homomorphism of F
into G and g a homomorphism of G into H. The ordered pair (f, g) is called an exact
sequence if

V(0) -/(F)
in other words, if the kernel of g is equal to the image off

197



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

The diagram

(12) F -U G -U H

is also called an exact sequence.

We consider similarly a diagram consisting of four A-modules and three
homomorphisms :

(13) E -U F -U G -^-&gt; H.

This diagram is called exact at F if the diagram E-&gt;F4G is exact; it

is called exact at G if F -4- G -» H is exact. If diagram (13) is acacf af F and at
G, it is simply called exact, or an exact sequence. Exact sequences with an arbi-
trary number of terms are defined similarly.

Remark. (1) If the ordered pair (/, g) is an exact sequence, then g°f= 0;
but of course this property does not characterize exact sequences, for it
only means that the image of/ is contained in the kernel of g.

In the statements below, E, F, G denote A-modules, the A-module reduced
to its identity element; the arrows represent A-module homomorphisms. As
there is only one homomorphism from the module to a module E (resp.
of E to 0), there is no point in giving these homomorphisms a name in the
exact sequences where they appear.



Proposition 3. (a) For



— &gt; E —



to be an exact sequence, it is necessary and sufficient that f be injective.
(b) For



E -£•&gt; F — ►



to be an exact sequence, it is necessary and sufficient that f be surjective.

(c) For

&gt; E -U F — &gt;

to be an exact sequence, it is necessary and sufficient thatf be bijective (in other words
(no. 2, Proposition 2) that/ be an isomorphism of E onto F).

(d) If F is a submodule o/E and i:¥ -&gt; E is the canonical injection, p:E^&gt; E/F
the canonical homomorphism, the diagram

(14) — &gt; F — '-&gt; E -^ E/F — &gt;

is an exact sequence.

198



EXACT SEQUENCES § 1.4

(e) Iff : E -&gt;F is a homomorphism, the diagram

— &gt; /(O) -U E -U F -U F//(E) -&gt;0

(wfor* i w ffo canonical injection and p the canonical surjection) is an exact sequence.

The proposition follows immediately from the definitions and Proposition
2 of no. 2.

Remarks. (2) To say that there is an exact sequence

— &gt; E -^&gt; F -^ G — &gt;

means that /is injective, g surjective and that the canonical bijection associ-
ated with g is an isomorphism of F//(E) onto G. It is also said that the triple
(F, /, g) is an extension of the module G by the module E (I, § 6, no. 7).

(3) If there is an exact sequence with 4 terms

E-^&gt;F-^*G-^H

the cokernel of/ is F//(E) = F/g (0) and the kernel of h isg(F) ; the canonical
bijection associated with g is therefore an isomorphism

Coker/-&gt; Ker h.

(4) Consider an ordered pair of A-module homomorphisms

(15) E -U F -^&gt; G.

For diagram (15) to be an exact sequence, it is necessary and sufficient that
there exist two A-modules S, T and homomorphisms a : E -&gt; S, b : S -&gt; F,
c : F -*- T, rf : T -&gt; G such that the three sequences



(16)



t



E — &gt; S — &gt;

S _!► F -U T — &gt;

— &gt; T -^-&gt; G



are exact and/ = b o a and g = doc.

If (15) is an exact sequence, then take S =/(E) = £ (0) and T = g(F),
b and rf being the canonical injections and a (resp. c) the homomorphism with
the same graph as/ (resp. g). Conversely, if S, T, a, i, c, rf satisfy the above

conditions, then /(E) = b(a(E)) = b(S) and"g(0) = c(d{0)) = *(0), hence

the exactness of (16) shows that/(E) = g (0).

The use of explicit letters to denote homomorphisms in an exact sequence
is often dispensed with when it is not necessary for the arguments.

199



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Remark. (5) The definition of an exact sequence extends immediately to
groups which are not necessarily commutative; in this case of course multi-
plicative notation is used with replaced by 1 in the formulae (if no con-
fusion arises). Parts (a), (b), (c) of Proposition 3 are still valid and also (d)
when F is a normal subgroup of E. Remark 2 and Proposition 3(e) hold on
condition that /(E) is a normal subgroup of F; Remarks 3 and 4 are valid
without modification.

5. PRODUCTS OF MODULES

Let (E t ) teI be a family of modules over the same ring A. It is immediately
verified that the product of the module structures on the E t (I, § 4, no. 8) is

an A-module structure on the product set E = 1 1 E t . With this structure the

set E is called the product module of the modules E t ; if x = (x t ), y — (y t ) are
two elements of E, then

= (*i + y t )
(A# t ) for all X e A.

Formulae (17) express the fact that the projections pr^E-^-Et are linear
mappings; these mappings are obviously surjective.



&lt; i7 &gt; fi.:: 1



Recall that if the indexing set I is empty, the product set 11 E t then

lei

consists of a single element; the product module structure on this set is
then that under which this unique element is 0.

Proposition 4. Let E = 1 1 E t be the product of a family of A-modules (E t ) teI .

For every A-module F and every family of linear mappings f : F -&gt; E t there exists
one and only one mapping f of F into E such that pr t of = f for all tel and this
mapping is linear.

This follows directly from the definitions.

Product of modules is "associative": if (JO^sl ^ s a partition of I, the canoni-
cal mapping

ru^mru)

tel A, e L \ 1 6 Ja /

is an isomorphism.

Proposition 5. (i) Let (E t ) teI , (F t ) teI be two families of A-modules with the same
indexing set I; for every family of linear mappings f:^ — &gt; F t (tel), the mapping

f: (x t ) -&gt; C/[(#i)) ofi. 1 E t into 1 1 F t {sometimes denoted by 1 1/J is linear.
(ii) Let (G t ) t6l be a third family of A-modules with I as indexing set and, for all

200



PRODUCTS OF MODULES § 1.5

i g I, let g t : F t -&gt; G t be a linear mapping; let g = 1 1 g t . For each of the sequences
E t -4- F t — &gt;• G t /o fo 6*ac£, &amp; w necessary and sufficient that the sequence

ru^* rubric,

be exact.

Assertion (i) follows immediately from the definitions. On the other hand,
to say that y — ( t/ t ) belongs to Ker(g) means that £ t (y t ) = for all t g I
and hence that y t £ Ker(g t ) for all t e I; similarly, to say that y belongs to

Im(/) means that there exists x = (#i) g 1 1 E t such that y = f(x), which is

equivalent to saying thaty t =f i (x l ) for all i g I or also thaty t g Im(/ t ) for all
tel; whence (ii).

Corollary. Under the conditions of Proposition 5, (i),

(18) Ker(/) = FI Ker(/ t ), Im(f) = II Im(f)

and there are canonical isomorphisms

Coim(/) -&gt; II Coim(f), Coker(/) = II C6ker(f0

obtained by respectively associating with the class of an element x = (x t ) of 1 1 E„

mod Ker(/), (resp. with the class of an element y = (y t ) ofl 1 F t , mod. Im(/))

the family of classes of the # t mod. Ker(y[) (resp. the family of classes of the y u
mod. Im(/)).

In particular, for f to be injective (resp. surjective, bijective, zero) it is necessary and
sufficient that, for all iel,f be injective (resp. surjective, bijective, zero).

If, for all i e I, we consider a submodule F, of E., the module 1 1 F. is a

iel l

submodule ofl 1 E t and by virtue of the Corollary to Proposition 5, there is a

canonical isomorphism

(i9) rj(Bjpo- 0^/04

An important example of a product of modules is that where all the factor
modules are equal to the same module F; their product F 1 is then just the set
of mappings of I into F. The diagonal mapping F -*- F 1 mapping *gF to the
constant function equal to x on I is linear. If (E t ) l6l is a family of A-modules

201



LINEAR ALGEBRA



and, for all t e I, / t : F -» E t is a linear mapping, then the linear mapping
x t-&gt; (f{x)) of F into 1 1 E ( is the composition of the mapping (x t ) »-* (ffa))

of F 1 into 1 1 E t and the diagonal mapping F -&gt; F 1 .

6. DIRECT SUM OF MODULES

Let (E t )i 6l be a family of A-modules and F = 1 1 E t their product. The set

E of x e F such that pr t x = except for a finite number of indices is obviously
a submodule of F, called the external direct sum (or simply direct sum) of the

family of modules (E t ) and denoted by © E t (I, § 4, no. 9). When I is finite,
then © E, = 1 1 E. : if I = (p, q\ (interval of Z), we also write

iel l iel ' v '

®E, = E P eE p+1 e.-.eE,.

tel

For all k g I, let J K be the mapping E K -&gt; F which associates with each
# K e E K the element of F such that pr l ( % / K (A; K )) =0 for t # k and
P t kUk( x k)) — x k'&gt; it i s immediate that j K is an injective linear mapping of
E K into the direct sum E of the E„ which we shall call the canonical injection; the
submodule J K (E K ) of E, isomorphic to E K , is called the component submodule
of E of index k. It is often identified with E K by means of/* K .

For all x e E = © E„ we have therefore



(20)



x = 2, j t (pr t *).



Proposition 6. Let (E t ) teI be a family of A-modules, M an A-module and, for all
i e I, letf:TL K -&gt; M be a linear mapping. Then there exists one and only one linear

mapping e: © E. -&gt; M such that, for all i el:

iel

(21) g°j\=f&gt;.

By virtue of (20), if g exists, then necessarily, for all x e © E t ,

g(x) = 2 g(ji(Ph(x)) = i/^pr^*)),

whence the uniqueness of g. Conversely, setting g(x) = 2i, / t (pr t (x)) for all
x g © E., it is immediately verified that a linear mapping has been defined

iel

satisfying the conditions of the statement.
202



DIRECT SUM OF MODULES § 1.6

When no confusion can arise, we write g = 2L, f (which is contrary to the

conventions of I, § 2, no. 1, when the family (f) is not of finite support).
In particular, if J is any subset of I, the canonical injections^ for lej

define a canonical linear mapping jj : \&amp; E t -&gt; \B E l5 which associates with

each (*i) ie i the element (*0iei such that x[ = * t for i e J, x[ = for i £ J; this
mapping is obviously injective. Moreover, if (JjJx 6 l is a partition of I, the

mapping i: (j) ( (±) Ej -&gt; \B E t corresponding to the family (j J} ) by Proposi-
tion 6 is an isomorphism called canonical ("associativity" of direct sums).

Corollary 1. Let (Ei) l6l , (F K ) Kelj be two families of A-modules. The mapping

(22) Hom 4 ( © E„ II F») - ( , II ^ Hom.tE,, FJ

which associates with each g e Hom A ( © E„ 1 1 FJ the family (pr x o g oj\) } is a
Z.-module isomorphism (called canonical).

This follows from Proposition 6 and no. 5, Proposition 4.
Corollary 2. Let (E t )i eI be a family of A-modules, F an A-module and, for each
i e I, let f : E t -&gt; F be a linear mapping. For f = 2L, f to be an isomorphism of

E = \±) E t onto F, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist for each i e I a linear
mapping g t : F -+ E t with the following properties :
(!) &amp; °/i = lE t &gt;r a// 1 e I.

(2) &amp; o/ K = 0/or i 9&amp; k.

(3) For a//y e F, the family (gi(y)) has finite support and

(23) y = 2/^M).

Note that if I is finite, the last condition may also be written as

(24) 2/^ =1 F .

Obviously the conditions are necessary for they are satisfied by the
gi = P r t°/- Conversely if they hold, for all yeF, g(y) = 2, j\(gi(y)) is
defined and it is immediate that g is a linear mapping of F into E. For all
y E F, f(g(y)) = 2-, figtiy)) = y by hypothesis. On the other hand, for all

x e E &gt; £k(/(*)) = gK\^f{W^ x ))) = ^cC/kCp^*))) = pr K (*) by hypothesis;

203



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

therefore g(f(x)) = Z .A (&amp;(/(*))) = ^ii(P r i(*)) = *&gt; which proves the
corollary.

Proposition 7. (i) Let (E,) iel , (F t ) teI be two families of A-modules with the same
indexing set I; for every family of linear mappings / t :E t -&gt; F t (i e I), the restriction

to © E t 0/ the linear mapping (# t ) •-&gt; (/ t (#i)) if a linear mapping f: © E t -» © F t

(foiofe/ by ®f v or ®f t {where f = f p @f p + 1 ® • • • ®f q if I = (A ?) w an

interval in Z).

(ii) l&gt;f (G t ) teI be a third family of A-modules with I &amp;y indexing set and, for all

i e I, let gi'.Yi -&gt; G t fo a /zwear mapping; we write g = © g t . For «w:A 0/ /fo .re-
quences E t -4- F t -4- G t to fo ixatf, zV w necessary and sufficient that the sequence

111
be exact.
Obviously, for all (x t ) e © E l5 the family (f(x t )) ^as finite support, whence

(i). On the other hand, to say that an element y = (y t ) of © F t belongs to

Ker(g) means that y t e Ker(g t ) for all t e I (no. 5, Proposition 5) ; similarly, if
y t e Im(/ t ) for all t e I, there exists for each telan^eE, such that y t = f (xj
and when y t = 0, it may be supposed that x t = 0; hence y e Im(/) and the
converse is obvious.

Corollary 1. Under the conditions of Proposition 7, (i),

(25) Ker(/) = © Ker(/ t ), Im(f) = © Im(/ t )
and there are canonical isomorphisms

Coim(/) -&gt; © Coim(/ t ), Coker(/) -&gt; © CokerCQ

defined as in no. 5, Corollary to Proposition 5. In particular, for f to be injective (resp.
surjective, bijective, zero), it is necessary and sufficient that each of the f be injective (resp
surjective, bijective, zero).

If, for all 1 e I, we consider a submodule F. of E,, the module © F. is a sub-

' ' lei

module of © E t and, by virtue of Corollary 1 to Proposition 7, there is a
canonical isomorphism

(26) $(*/"■&gt; -(©,*)/( ©4
204



INTERSECTION AND SUM OF SUBMODULES § 1.7

Corollary 2. Let (E t ) l6l , (E[) l6l , (F x ) XeL , (F' K ) Xell be four families of A-modules
and, for each lei (resp. each XeL), M t :E[-&gt;E t (resp. z\:F x -&gt;-F A ) a linear
mapping. Then the diagram

Hom( © E t ', n Fl) —^ II Hom(E;, F*)

\i6l " Kel, V (i,M£lxL v



Hom(©M t) II%)



II Hom(«t, px)



Hom( E, I! F x ) &gt; EC Hom(E t , F x )

(where &lt;J&gt; and §' are the canonical isomorphisms defined in Corollary 1 to Proposition 6)
is commutative.

The verification follows immediately from the definitions.

When all the E t are equal to the same A-module E, the direct sum © E t

is also denoted by E (I) : its elements are the mappings of I into E with finite
support. If, for all i,f is taken to be the identity mapping E -&gt;• E, by Proposi-
tion 6, a linear mapping E (I) -&gt; E is obtained, called codiagonal, which associ-
ates with every family (* t ) teI of elements of E, of finite support, its sum 2-, # t .

Remark. Recall that the definition of direct sum extends immediately to
a family (E t ) t6l of groups which are not necessarily commutative, multi-
plicative notation of course replacing the additive notation; we then say
"restricted product" or "restricted sum" instead of "direct sum" (I, §4, no. 9).

Note that E is a normal subgroup of the product F = 1 1 E t and that each

of the ,/k (E K ) is a normal subgroup of F; moreover, for two distinct indices
X, [x, every element of j K (E K ) is permutable with every element of J W (EJ.
Proposition 6 extends to the general case with the hypothesis that, for two
distinct indices X, [x, every element of /^(Ex) is permutable in M with every
element of/u(E w ) (I, § 4, no. 9, Proposition 12). The property of "associa-
tivity" of the restricted sum follows immediately from this. Proposition 7
and its Corollaries 1 and 2 hold without modification.

7. INTERSECTION AND SUM OF SUBMODULES

For every family (M t ) ieI of submodules of an A-module E, the intersection

D E. is a submodule of E. If, for each i e I, (b. denotes the canonical homo-
tel ' ' T

morphism E -&gt; E/M t , N M t is the kernel of the homomorphism §:x h-&gt; (&lt;j&gt; t (*))
of E into 1 1 (E/M t ), in other words, there is an exact sequence

(27) — * nM t -&gt;E-^n (E/M t ).

205



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

The linear mapping $ and the mapping

E /(f.l M ')^0( E / M -)

which is obtained by passing to the quotient, are called canonical.
In particular:

Proposition 8. If a family (M t )i eI of submodules ofJL has intersection reduced to
E is canonically isomorphic to a submodule ofLL (E/MJ.

Given a subset X of an A-module E, the intersection F of the submodules
of E containing X is called the submodule generated by X and X is called
a generating set (or generating system) of F (I, § 4, no. 3) ; for a family (a t ) te i of
elements of E, the submodule generated by the set of a l is called the sub-
module generated by the family (a t ) .

An A-module is called finitely generated if it has a finite generating set.

Proposition 9. The submodule generated by a family (a,) teI of elements of an A-
module E is the set of linear combinations of the family (a t ).

Every submodule of E which contains all the a t also contains the linear
combinations of the a,. Conversely, formulae (1) and (2) of no. 1 prove that
the set of linear combinations of the a, is a submodule of E which obviously
contains all the a t and is therefore the smallest submodule containing them.

Corollary 1 . Let u : E -&gt; F be a linear mapping, S a subset of E and M the
submodule ofE generated by S. Then m(M) is the submodule ofF generated by u(S).

In particular, the image under u of any finitely generated submodule of
E is a finitely generated submodule of F.

Remark. If u(x) - for all xeS, then also «(*) = for all x e M. We
shall sometimes refer to this result as the "principle of extension of linear
identities" or "principle of extension by linearity".

In particular, to verify that a linear mapping m:E-&gt;F is of the form
v o §, where t&gt;:E/M — &gt; F is linear and &lt;|&gt;:E — &gt; E/M is the canonical projec-
tion, it suffices to verify that «(S) = 0.

Corollary 2. The submodule generated by the union of a family (M t ) t6l of sub-
modules of a module E is identical with the set of sums 2, x lt where (x t ) ieI runs through
the set of families of elements ofE of finite support such that x l e M t ybr all iel.

Clearly every linear combination of elements of U M t is of the above form ;
the converse is obvious.

206



INTERSECTION AND SUM OF SUBMODULES § 1.7

The submodule of E generated by the union of a family (Mt) l6l of sub-
modules of E is called the sum of the family (M t ) and is denoted by 2, M % .

If for all i G I, h % is the canonical injection M t -&gt; E and h: (# t ) i-&gt; 2&lt; /r t (# t ) the
linear mapping of © M t into E corresponding to the family (h t ) (no. 6,
Proposition 6), 2, M t is the image of h; in other words, there is an exact sequence

(28) © M t -U E — &gt; e/( 2 M t ) — &gt; 0.

Corollary 3. If(M. K ) Keh is a right directed family of submodules of an A-module
E, the sum 2* M» is identical with the union U M, .

U M^ &lt;=■ 2, M K is always true without hypothesis; on the other hand,
for every finite subfamily (M Aj ) X6j of (M,J XgL , there exists by hypothesis
a (j. e L such that M K &lt;=■ M u for all X e J, hence 2 M K c M w and it thus fol-
lows from Corollary 2 that 2, M» c: U M,.

Corollary 4. Z&gt;£ 0-&gt;E-&gt;F-^»G-&gt;0 be an exact sequence of A-modules, S a
generating system of E, T a generating system of G. if T' w a subset of F jmcA that
g(T') = T, T' U/"(S) w a generating system ofF.

The submodule F' of F generated by T' U/(S) contains /(E) and, as g(F')
contains T, g(F') = G; hence F' = F.

Corollary 5. In an exact sequence 0— ^E-&gt;F-^-G-&gt;0 of A-modules, if E
and G are finitely generated, so is F.

Proposition 10. Let M, N be two submodules of an A-module E. Then there are
two exact sequences

(29) — &gt; MnN -^» M © N -^4 M + N — &gt;

(30) — &gt; E/(M nN)A (E/M) © (E/N) -^4- E/(M + N) — &gt;
a;A«-£ z:M -&gt; M + N,j:N -&gt; M + N are the canonical injections,

p : E/M -&gt; E/(M + N) W ? : E/N -&gt; E/(M + N)
the canonical surjections and where the homomorphisms u and v are defined as follow:

207



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

iff.M n N -&gt; M -&gt;- M © N and g:M n N -&gt; N -&gt; M © N are /fa canonical
injections, u=f+g,andifr:EI(MnN)-&gt; E/M -&gt; (E/M) © (E/N) anrf

j:E/(M n N) -&gt; E/N -» (E/M) © (E/N)

are the canonical mappings, v = r + s.

We prove the exactness of (29) : obviously i — j is surjective and u is injec-
tive. On the other hand, to say that (i — j) (x, y) = 0, where x e M and
yeN, means that i(x) — j(y) = 0, hence i(x) = j{y) = zgMhN, whence
by definition x = f{z), y = g(z), which proves that Ker(t —j) = Im u.

We prove the exactness of (30) : clearly p — q is surjective. On the other
hand, to say that v(t) = for *eE/(M n N) means that r(t) = s(t) == 0,
hence t is the class mod. (M n N) of an element z e E whose classes mod. M
and mod. N are zero, which implies zeMnN and t = 0. Finally, to say
that (p — q)(x,y) = 0, where x e E/M, y e E/N means that p(x) = q(y), or
also that there exist two elements z', z" of E whose classes mod. M and mod. N
are respectively x and y and which are such that z' — z" e M + N. Hence
there are ;'eM,;"eN such that z' — z" = t' — f, whence

z' - t' = z" - f = z.

Let w be the class mod. (M nN)ofz; r(w) is the class mod. M of z and hence
also that of z', that is x; similarly s(w) = y, which completes the proof that
Ker(/» — q) = Im v.

8. DIRECT SUMS OF SUBMODULES

Definition 6. An A-module E is said to be the direct sum of a family (M t )i 6l of
submodules of E if the canonical mapping \d M t -&gt; E (no. 6) is an isomorphism.

It amounts to the same to say that every x 6 E can be written in a unique
way in the form x = 2-, x., where x t e E t for all tel; the element # t thus

corresponding to x is called the component of x in E t ; the mapping ai-*.^ is
linear.

Remark. ( 1 ) Let (M t ) t e I} (N t ) t e i be two families of submodules of a module E,
with the same indexing set; suppose that E is both the direct sum of the family
(M t ) and of the family (NJ and that N t c M t for all t e I. Then N t = M t
for all tel, as follows immediately from no. 6, Corollary 1 to Proposition 7
applied to the canonical injections f : N, -&gt; M,.

Proposition 11. Let (M t ) teI be a family of submodules of an A-module E. The
following properties are equivalent:

(a) The submodule 2* M t is the direct sum of the family (M t ) leI .
208



DIRECT SUMS OF SUBMODULES § 1.8

(b) The relation 2* x l = 0, where x k e M t for all i e I, implies # t = for all

16 I.

(c) For all kg I, Jfo intersection ofM. K and 2, M t reduces to 0.

It is immediate that (a) and (b) are equivalent, since the relation
2, # t = 2* y l is equivalent to Z, (* t — y t ) = 0. On the other hand, by virtue
of Definition 6, (a) implies (c) by the uniqueness of the expression of an
element of \£) M t as a direct sum of elements # t 6 M t . Finally, the relation

2i, # t = 0, where x t e M t for all i, can be written, for all k e I, x K = 2* ( — # t ) ;
condition (c) then implies x K — for all k 6 I, hence (c) implies (b).

Definition 7. An endomorphism e of an A-module E is called a projector ifeoe = e
(in other words, if e is an idempotent in the ring End(E)). In End(E) a family
(^) XeL of projectors is called orthogonal if e K o e^ = Ofor X # [i.

Proposition 12. Let E be an A-module.

(i) IfE is the direct sum of a family (M. K ) Kelj of submodules and, for allxeE,
e K (x) is the component of x in M x , (e^) is an orthogonal family of projectors such that

x = 2-, eJx) for all x e E.

(ii) Conversely, if (^)xeL ^ an orthogonal family of projectors in End(E) such

that x = 2i, e K (x) for all x e E, E is the direct sum of the family of submodules

A. € L

M x = « X (E).

Property (i) follows from the definitions and (ii) is a special case of no. 6,
Corollary 2 to Proposition 6, applied to the canonical injections M^ -&gt; E and
the mappings e K \ E -» M v

Note that when L is finite the condition x = 2, e^{x) for all # e E may
also be written in End(E).

(31) ^=2^

Corollary. For every projector eofE,E is the direct sum of the image M = e(E)
and the kernel N = g x (0) of e; for all x = x x + x 2 e E with x x e M and x 2 6 N,
x i = e { x )i 1 — e w a projector ofE of image N and forw/ M.

(1 — e) 2 = 1 — 2e + e 2 = 1 — e in End(E) and hence 1 — e is a pro-
jector; as also «(1 — e) = (1 — e)e = £ — * 2 = 0, E is the direct sum of the
images M and N of e and 1 — e by Proposition 12. Finally, for all x eE, the
relation x e M is equivalent to x = e(x) ; for x = e{x) implies by definition
x e M and, conversely, if x = e(x') with x' e E, then e(x) = e 2 (x') = e{x') = x;

209



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

this shows therefore that M is the kernel of 1 - e and, exchanging the roles
of e and 1 — e, it is similarly seen that N is the kernel of e.

Remark. (2) Let E, F be two A-modules such that E is the direct sum of a
finite family (M 1 ) 1&lt;J&lt;m of submodules and F the direct sum of a. finite family
(Ny)i&lt;y &lt;n of submodules. Then it is known (no. 6, Corollary 1 to
Proposition 6) that Hom A (E, F) is canonically identified with the product

I~I Hom A (M t , N,) ; to be precise, to a family (%), where u jt e Hom A (M ( , N } )
there corresponds the linear mapping «:E -&gt; F defined as follows. It suffices
to define the restriction of « to each of the M t and for each x t e M ( ,
n

3 = J.

Now let G be a third A-module, the direct sum of a finite family
(Pfc)i&gt;sfc«p of submodules; let v be a linear mapping of F into G and let
(v k) ) e O Hom A (N y , P fc ) be the family corresponding to it canonically. For
all x t 6 Mj,

n p n

Thus it is seen that if we write

n

(32) w M = 2 v kj o uj t e Hom A (M„ P fc )

the family (w kt ) corresponds canonically to the composite linear mapping
w = vou from E to G (cf. § 10, no. 5).

9. SUPPLEMENTARY SUBMODULES

Definition 8. In an A-module E, two submodules M 1} M 2 are said to be supple-
mentary if E is the direct sum ofM. x and M 2 .

Proposition 1 1 of no. 8 shows that, for M ± and M 2 to be supplementary,
it is necessary and sufficient that M x + M 2 = E and M x n M 2 = {0} (cf. I,
§ 4, no. 9, Proposition 15).

Proposition 13. Let M l5 M 2 be two supplementary submodules in an A-module E.
The restriction to M x of the canonical mapping E -&gt; E/M 2 is an isomorphism of M x
onto E/M 2 .

This linear mapping is surjective since M x + M 2 = E and it is injective
since its kernel is the intersection of M x and the kernel M 2 of E -&gt; E/M 2 and
hence reduces to {0}.

Corollary. If M 2 and M 2 are two supplements of the same submodule M x of E,
the set of ordered pairs (x, x') e M 2 x M 2 such that, x - x' e M x is the graph of
an isomorphism of M 2 onto M 2 .

210



SUPPLEMENTARY SUBMODULES § 1 .9

It is immediate that it is the graph of the composite isomorphism

M 2 -&gt;E/M 1 -^M^.

Definition 9. A submodule M of an A-module E is called a direct factor ofYLif
it has a supplementary submodule in E.

When this is so, E/M is isomorphic to a supplement of M (Proposition 13).

A submodule does not necessarily admit a supplement (Exercise 11).

When a submodule is a direct factor, it has in general several distinct

supplements; these supplements are however canonically isomorphic to
one another (Corollary to Proposition 13).

Proposition 14. For a submodule M.ofa module E to be a direct factor, it is neces-
sary and sufficient that there exist a projector of E whose image is M or a projector of
E whose kernel is M.

This follows immediately from no. 8, Proposition 12 and Corollary.

Proposition 15. Given an exact sequence of A-modules

(33) — &gt; E -U. F -±-&gt; G — &gt;

the following propositions are equivalent:

(a) The submodule f(E) of F is a direct factor.

(b) There exists a linear retraction r:F-&gt;E associated with f (Set Theory, II,
§ 3, no. 8, Definition 11).

(c) There exists a linear section s:G -&gt; F associated with g (Set Theory, II, § 3,
no. 8, Definition 11).

When this isso,f+ s: E G -&gt; F is an isomorphism.

If there exists a projector e in End(F) such that e(F) = /(E), the homo-
-l
morphism/o ^:F-&gt;E is a linear retraction associated with/; conversely, if

there exists such a retraction r, it is immediate that/o r is a projector in F

whose image is /(E), hence (a) and (b) are equivalent (Proposition 14).

If/(E) admits a supplement E' in F and j:E' -&gt; F is the canonical injection,

g o j is an isomorphism of E' onto G and the inverse isomorphism, considered

as a mapping of G into F, is a linear section associated with g. Conversely,

if such a section s exists, s o g is a projector in F whose kernel is /(E), hence

(a) and (c) are equivalent (Proposition 14). Moreover s is a bijection of G

onto s(G) and as s(G) is supplementary to/(E),/ + s is an isomorphism.

Note that being given r (resp. s) is equivalent to being given a supple-
ment of /(E) in F, namely the kernel of r (resp. image of s).

When the exact sequence (33) satisfies the conditions of Proposition 15, it is
said to split or (F,/, g) is said to be a trivial extension of G by E (I, § 6, no. 1).

211



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Corollary 1 . Let m : E — &gt; F be a linear mapping. For there to exist a linear mapping
v:F -&gt; E such that u° v = 1 F (the case where u is said to be right invertible and
v is said to be the right inverse qfu), it is necessary and sufficient that u be surjective
and that its kernel be a direct factor in E. The submodule Im(z&gt;) qfEis then a supple-
ment ofK.er(u).

It is obviously necessary that u be surjective; as v is then a section associated
with u, the conclusion follows from Proposition 15.

Corollary 2. Let m:E -&gt; F be a linear mapping. For there to exist a linear mapping
v.F -*» E such that v ° u = 1 E (the case where u is said to be left invertible and
v is said to be the left inverse qfu), it is necessary and sufficient that u be injective and
that its image be a direct factor in F. The submodule Ker(y) ofFis then a supplement
qflm(u).

It is obviously necessary that u be injective; as v is then a retraction associ-
ated with u, the conclusion also follows from Proposition 15.

Remarks. (1) Let M, N be two supplementary submodules in an A-module
E, p, q the projectors of E onto M and N respectively, corresponding to
the decomposition of E as a direct sum of M and N. It is known (no. 6,
Corollary 1 to Proposition 6) that, for every A-module F, the mapping
(«, v) h-&gt; u o p + v o q is an isomorphism of

Hom A (M, F) Hom A (N, F)

onto Hom A (E, F). The image of Hom A (M, F) under this isomorphism is
the set of linear mappings a;:E — &gt; F such that w(x) = Ofor all xeN.

(2) If M, N are two submodules of E such that M n N is a direct factor
of M and N, then MnNis also a direct factor of M + N: if P (resp. QJ
is a supplement of M fi N in M (resp. N), M + N is the direct sum of
MnN,P and Q, as is immediately verified.

10. MODULES OF FINITE LENGTH

Recall (I, § 4, no. 4, Definition 7) that an A-module M is called simple if it
is not reduced to and it contains no submodule distinct from M and {0}.
An A-module M is said to be of finite length if it has a Jordan-Holder series
(M^o^i^n and the number n of quotients of this series (which does not depend
on the Jordan-Holder series of M considered) is then called the length of M
(I, § 4, no. 7, Definition 1 1) ; we shall denote it by long(M) or long A (M). An
A-module which is reduced to is of length 0; if M is a non-zero A-module
of finite length then long(M) &gt; 0.

Proposition 16. Let M be an A-module and N a submodule ofM; for M to be
of finite length, it is necessary and sufficient that N and M/N be so, and then

(34) long(N) + long(M/N) = long(M).

The proof has been given in I, § 4, no. 7, Proposition 10.

212



MODULES OF FINITE LENGTH § 1.10

Corollary 1. Let M be an A-module of finite length; for a submodule NofbAto
be equal to M, it is necessary and sufficient that long(N) = long(M).

Corollary 2. Let w:M-&gt;N be an A-module homomorphism. If M or N is of
finite length, so is Im(u). IfWLis of finite length, so is Ker(w) and

(35) long(Im(tt)) + long(Ker(w)) = long(M).
IfN is of finite length, so is Coker(u) and

(36) long(Im(w)) + long(Coker(w)) = long(N).

Corollary 3. Let (Mj) 0&lt;J&lt;n be a finite family of A-modules of finite length. If
there exists an exact sequence of linear mappings

(37) — &gt; M -^-&gt; M x -2+ M 2 — &gt; ••• — &gt; M n _! ^&gt; M ft — &gt;
then

n

(38) 2 o (-l)*long(M fc )=0.

The corollary is obvious for n = 1 and is just Proposition 16 for n = 2;
we argue by induction on n. If M^_ x = Im(M n _ 2 ), then, by the induction
hypothesis,

n-2

2 o (-l)*long(M fc ) 4- (-l)»- 1 long(M;_ 1 ) =0.

On the other hand, the exact sequence -&gt; M^_ x -»■ M n _! -&gt; M n -&gt; gives

long(M;_ 1 ) + long(M n ) = long(M n _ 1 ),

whence relation (38).

Corollary 4. Let M and N be two submodules of finite length of an A-module E ;
then M + N is of finite length and

(39) long(M + N) + long(M nN)= long(M) + long(N).
It suffices to apply Corollary 3 to the exact sequence (29) (no. 7).

0-»MnN-^M©N-&gt;M + N-&gt;0

using the fact that long(M © N) = long(M) + long(N) by (34).

Corollary 5. Let M be an A-module the sum of a family (NJ of submodules of
finite length. Then M is of finite length and

(40) long(M) &lt; 2long(N0.

213



LINEAR ALGEBRA

Moreover, for the two sides of (40) to be equal, it is necessary and sufficient that M
be the direct sum of the N t .

It has been seen (no. 7, formula (28)) that there is a canonical surjective
linear mapping h: ©N t -&gt; M; hence the corollary follows from (35).

Corollary 6. Let M and N be two submodules of an A-module E such that E/M
and E/N are modules of finite length; then E/(M n N) is of finite length and

(41) long(E/(M n N)) + long(E/(M + N)) = long(E/M) + long(E/N).
It suffices to apply Corollary 3 to the exact sequence (30)

-&gt; E/(M n N) ^ (E/M) © (E/N) -» E/(M + N) -&gt;
using the fact that

long((E/M) © (E/N)) = long(E/M) + long(E/N).

Corollary 7. Let (M,) be a finite family of submodules of an A-module E such that
the E/Mj are modules of finite length. Then E/lf i MJ is of finite length and

(42) long(E/(Q M,)j ^ 2 long(E/M i ).

It has been seen (formula (27)) that there is a canonical injective linear
mapping E/(fl M f ) -&gt; © (E/M,)-

Remark. With the exception of no. 7, Proposition 9, a// the results of nos. 2 to 10
are valid for arbitrary commutative groups with operators, submodules (resp.
quotient modules) being replaced in the statements by stable subgroups (resp.
quotient groups by stable subgroups) ; we also make the convention of calling
homomorphisms of groups with operators "linear mappings". The corollaries
to no. 7, Proposition 9 are also valid for commutative groups with operators :
this is obvious for Corollaries 4 and 5, as also for Corollary 2, since

a( Z!, #t) = Z-, ax t for every operator a, and Corollary 3 follows from it.

As for Corollary 1, it suffices to note that if N is a stable subgroup of F contain-

-l -l

ing m(S), u (N) is a stable subgroup of E containing S, hence u (N) contains

M and therefore u(M) &lt;=■ N.

11. FREE FAMILIES. BASES

Let A be a ring, T a set and consider the A-module A™. By definition, it is
the external direct sum of a family (M t ) teT of A-modules all equal to A s and
for all teT there is a canonical injection j t :A s -&gt; A^ T) (no. 6). We write

214



FREE FAMILIES. BASES §1.11

j t (l) = e t so that e t = (8 w ) t . eT , where 8 tt , is equal to if t' # t, to 1 if
t' = t ("Kronecker symbol"; (t, t') i-&gt; 8 W , is just the characteristic function of
the diagonal of T x T) ; every x = (y (eT e A&lt; T) may then be written uniquely :

x = 2^ %&amp;. The mapping &lt;j&gt; : 1 1-&gt; e t of T into A^ T) is called canonical; it is zn/Vo

ft'w if A is non-zero. We shall see that the ordered pair (A&lt; T) , &lt;j&gt;) is a solution
of a universal mapping problem (Set Theory, TV, § 3, no. 1).

Proposition 17. For every A-module E and every mapping /:T -&gt; E, J/wr* mrt.j
OH* 0/m/ on/y o/# A-linear mapping g:A™ -&gt; E mA that/ = go §.

The condition /= g o &lt;j&gt; means that gfo) = /(*) for all /eT, which is
equivalent to g(%e t ) = £/*(*) for all 5 e A and all * e T and also means that
g oj t is the linear mapping £ h-&gt; £/(*) of A 8 into E for all t e T; the proposi-
tion is therefore a special case of no. 6, Proposition 6.

The linear mapping g is said to be determined by the family (f(t)) teT of
elements of E; by definition

(«) «(&amp;«*)-&lt;&amp; ww.

The kernel R of £ is the set of (£ t ) eAf such that Z, £ f /(*) =0; it is

sometimes said that the module R is the module of linear relations between the
elements of the family (f(t)) teT . The exact sequence

(44) — &gt; R — &gt; A™ -U E

is said to be determined by the family (f(t)) t



HeT'



Corollary 1. LetT, T' be two sets, g:T -&gt; T' a mapping. Then there exists one
and only one A-linear mapping /: A (T) -» A &lt;T,) which renders commutative the diagram

T * t» T'

♦i J*'

A&lt;t&gt; — &gt; A&lt; T '&gt;
/

where &lt;j&gt; and &lt;j&gt;' are the canonical mappings.

It suffices to apply Proposition 1 7 to the composite mapping T -4- T' -^ A (T,) .

Corollary 2. For a family (o^t of elements of an A-module E to be a generating
system of E, if w necessary and sufficient that the linear mapping A™ -&gt; E determined
by this family be surjective.

This is just another way of expressing Proposition 9 of no. 7.

215



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Definition 10. A family (a t ) teT of elements of an A-module E is called a free
family (resp. a basis ofE) if the linear mapping A™ -&gt; E determined by this family
is injective (resp. bijective) . A module is called free if it has a basis.

In particular, a commutative group G is called free if G (written additively)
is a. free X-module (cf. I, § 7, no. 7).

Definition 10, together with Corollary 2 to Proposition 17, show that a
basis of an A-module E is a free generating family of E. Every free family of
elements of E is thus a basis of the submodule it generates.

By definition, the A-module Ag T) is free and the family (e t ) teT is a basis
(called canonical) of this A-module. When A ^ {0}, T is often identified with

the set of e t by the canonical bijection 1 1-&gt; e t ; this amounts to writing 2* \ t . t

nstead of 2* \ t a t for the elements of As T) . When this convention is adopted,

the elements of As T) are called formal linear combinations (with coefficients in A)
of the elements ofT.

Definition 10 and Proposition 17 give immediately the following result:

Corollary 3. Let E be a free A-module, (a t ) teT a basis ofE, F an A-module and
(^t)teT a family of elements of¥. There exists one and only one linear mapping f.E — &gt; F
such that

(45) f(a t ) = b t for all t e T.

For f to be injective (resp. surjective), it is necessary and sufficient that (b t ) be a free
family in F (resp. a generating system ofF).

When a family (a t ) teT is not free, it is called related. Definition 10 may also
be expressed as follows: to say that the family {a t ) teT is free means that the

relation 2, X t a t = (where the family (X t ) is of finite support) implies X t =

for all teT; to say that {a t ) teT is a basis of E means that every x e E can be

written in one and only one way in the form x = 2&lt; % t a t ; for all t eT, £ t is

then called the component (or coordinate) of x of index t with respect to the basis (a t ) ;
the mapping x -&gt; £ t from E to A s is linear.

Suppose A 7^ {0}; then, in an A-module E, two elements of a free family
( a t)teT whose indices are distinct are themselves distinct: for if a v = a r for

t' 7^ /", then 2., \ t a t = with X f . = 1, X r = — 1 and X 4 = for the elements

of T distinct from t' and t". A subset S of E will be called a free subset (resp. a
basis of E) if the family defined by the identity mapping of S onto itself is
free (resp. a basis of E) ; every family defined by a bijective mapping of an
indexing set onto S is then free (resp. a basis). The elements of a free subset
of E are also called linearly independent.

216



FREE FAMILIES. BASES § 1.11

If a subset of E is not free, it is called related or a related system and its elements
are said to be linearly dependent.

Every subset of a free subset is free; in particular, the empty subset is free
and is a basis of the submodule {0} of E.

Proposition 18. For a family (a t ) teT of a module E to be free , it is necessary and
sufficient that every finite subfamily of (a t ) teT be free.

This follows immediately from the definition.

Proposition 18 shows that the set of free subsets of E, ordered by in-
clusion, is inductive (Set Theory, III, § 2, no. 4) ; as it is non-empty (since
belongs to it), it has a maximal element (a t ) te iby Zorn's Lemma. It follows
(if A 5* {0}) that for all x e E there exist an element \l # of A and a

family (£ t ) of element A such that \uc = Z, 5 t a t (cf. § 7, no. 1).

Proposition 19. Let E be an A-module, the direct sum of a family (M x ) Kelj of
submodules. If, for each X s L, S„ is a free subset (resp. generating set, basis) of M^,
then S = U S x is a free subset (resp. generating set, basis) ofE.

The proposition follows from the definitions and the relation A* s&gt; = kD Af A)
(associativity of direct sums, cf. no. 6).

Remark. (1) By Definition 10, if A ^ {0} and (a t ) le i is a free family, no
element a K can be equal to a linear combination of the a L of index i ^ x.
But conversely, a family (a t ) satisfying this condition is not necessarily a
free family. For example, let A be an integral domain and a, b two distinct
non-zero elements; in A, considered as an A-module, a and b form a
related system, since (-b)a + ab = 0. But in general there does not exist
an element x e A such that a = xb of b = xa (cf. however § 7, no. 1, Remark).

An element x of a module E is called free if {*} is a free subset, that is if the
relation ax = implies a = 0. Every element of a free subset is free and in
particular cannot belong to any free subset when A # {0}.

Remarks. (2) A free module can have elements ^0 which are not free:
for example, the A-module A s is free but the right divisors of zero in A are
not free elements of A s .

(3) In the additive group Z/(n) (n an integer ^2) considered as a Z-
module, no element is free and a fortiori Z/(n) is not a free module.

(4) It can happen that every element ^ of an A-module is free without
the module being free. For example, the field Q. of rational numbers is a
Z-module with this property, for two elements ^0 of Q always form a

217



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

related system and a basis of Q, could therefore only contain a single element
a; but the elements of Q, are not all of the form na with neZ (cf. VII, § 3).

Proposition 20. Every A-module E is isomorphic to a quotient module of a free
A-module.

If T is a generating set of E, there exists a surjective linear mapping
Aj T) -» E (Corollary 2 to Proposition 17), and if R is the kernel of this mapping,
E is isomorphic to A S T) /R.

In particular we may take T = E; then there is a surjective linear map-
ping A&lt; E) -&gt; E, called canonical.

In particular, to say that an A-module E is finitely generated (no. 7) means that
it is isomorphic to a quotient of a free A-module with a finite basis or also that
there exists an exact sequence of the form

A" -&gt; E -&gt; (nan integer &gt; 0) .

Note that if A # {0} every basis of a finitely generated free module E is neces-
sarily finite, for if S is a finite generating system and B a basis of E, each ele-
ment of S is a linear combination of a finite number of elements of B and if
B' is the set of all the elements of B which figure thus in the expression for the
elements of S, B' is finite and every x e E is a linear combination of elements
of B', hence B' = B.

Proposition 21. Every exact sequence ofA-modules

— &gt; G -^&gt; E -U F — &gt;

in which ¥ is a free A-module, splits (no. 9). To be precise, if{b,,) Xel , is a basis ofF
and, for each XeL, a K is an element ofE such thatf(a K ) = b K , the family (flOxeL "
free and generates a supplementary submodule to g(G).

There exists one and only one linear mapping h : F -»■ E such that h(b K ) = a x
for all X e L (Corollary 3 to Proposition 17). As h is a linear section associated
with/, the proposition follows from I, § 4, no. 9, Proposition 15.

Remark. (5) Let (a t ) 1&lt;l&lt;n be a basis of an A-module E and let (b t ) 1&lt;t &lt; n
be a family of elements of E given by the relations

(46) b t = Xi,fli + • • • + Xjjflj (1 &lt; * &lt; n)

where X 14 is invertible in A; then (6 4 ) 1&lt;J&lt;n is a basis of E. It suffices to argue
by induction on n, the proposition being obvious for n = 1. If E' is the
submodule of E generated by the family (a t ) 1&lt;i &lt;„_i, it follows from the
induction hypothesis that (b i ) 1&lt;i&lt;n - 1 is a basis of E'; on the other hand,
it follows from (46) that if yib n e E' with jx e A, then also \xk nn a n e E',

218



ANNIHILATORS. FAITHFUL MODULES. MONOGENOUS MODULES § 1.12

whence (jl = since X„ n is invertible. The family (*&lt;)i&lt;i&lt; n is thus free and,
as

^n = —\in ^ln a l — • • • — X^" n X n -l,n fl n-l + X nn n

it is seen that (£j)i&lt; t &lt;„ is a generating system of E, which completes the
proof. This result is easily generalized to a family (a t )iei whose indexing
set I is well ordered.

12. ANNIHILATORS. FAITHFUL MODULES. MONOGENOUS MODULES

Definition 11. The annihilator of a subset Sofan A-module E is the set of elements
a e A such that cue = Qfor all xeS.

The annihilator of S is usually denoted by Ann(S) ; for a subset S consisting
of a single element x, we write Ann (at) instead of Ann({#}) and call Ann(#)
the annihilator of x.

The relation ax = may also be expressed by saying that x is annihilated
by*.

It is immediate that the annihilator of an arbitrary subset S of E is a left
ideal of A; for it to be equal to A, it is necessary and sufficient (by virtue of
(M IV )) that S = {0}. If two subsets S, T of E are such that ScT, the anni-
hilator of T is contained in the annihilator of S. If (S t ) ie i is an arbitrary family

of subsets of E, the annihilator of the union U S. is the intersection of the

i

annihilators of the S t . In particular, the annihilator of a subset S of E is the
intersection of the annihilators of the elements of S. To say that an element
of E is free is equivalent to saying that its annihilator is {0}. For all x e E and
all a e A, the annihilator of coc is the set of (3 e A such that (3&lt;x e Ann(x).

The annihilator of a submodule M of E is a two-sided ideal of A; for, if cue =
for all x e M, then also ol($x) = for all x e M and all (3 e A, hence a(3 be-
longs to the annihilator of M for all (3 e A. In particular, the annihilator of E
is a two-sided ideal of A.

For all a e A, let h a be the homothety x (-»• auc; it is known that the mapping
a h&gt; h a of A into the endomorphism ring S = Hom z (E, E) of the commu-
tative group (without operators) E, is a ring homomorphism (§2, no. 5).
The inverse image of under this homomorphism is the annihilator o of E ;
the image of A under the homomorphism a ■-»■ h a is therefore isomorphic to
the quotient ring A/a. The module E is called faithful if its annihilator a
reduces to 0.

Let E be any A-module, a a two-sided ideal of A contained in Ann(E)
and let d be an element of the quotient ring A/a; for all x e E, the element
ax is the same for all the a e A belonging to the class a mod. a; if this ele-
ment is denoted by dbr, it is immediately seen that the mapping

219



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

(d, x) \-&gt; &amp;x defines (with addition on E) an (A/a) -module structure on E.
When a = Ann(E), the (A/a)-module E thus defined is faithful; we shall
say that it is the faithful module associated with the A-module E. Observe
that every submodule of an A-module E is also a submodule of the associ-
ated faithful module and conversely.

Definition 12. A module is called monogenous if it is generated by a single element.

Proposition 9 of no. 7 shows that, if E is a monogenous A-module and a is an
element generating E, E is identical with the set A. a of E,a, where £ runs
through A.

Examples. (1) Every monogenous group, being commutative (I, §4,
no. 10, Proposition 18), is a monogenous Z-module.

(2) If A is a commutative ring, the monogenous submodules of the
A-module A are just the principal ideals (I, § 8, no. 6) of the ring A.

(3) Every simple A-module E is monogenous, since the submodule of
E generated by an element ^ of E is necessarily equal to E.

Proposition 22. Let A be a ring. Every quotient module of A s is monogenous. Con-
versely, let E be a monogenous A-module, c a generator of E and a its annihilator; the
linear mapping \\-&gt;\c defines, when passing to the quotient, an isomorphism of A s /o
onto E.

As A s is itself monogenous, being generated by 1, the first assertion follows
from no. 7, Corollary 1 to Proposition 9. The second is obvious, since £ h&gt; £c
is by hypothesis surjective and has kernel a.

Note that, if A is not commutative, the annihilators of two distinct gener-
ators c, c' of a monogenous A-module E are in general distinct and are also
distinct from the annihilator of the module E. On the other hand, if A is
commutative, the annihilator of a generator c of E is contained in the annihilator
of every element of E and hence is the annihilator of the whole of E.

Corollary. Every submodule of a monogenous A-module E is isomorphic to a quo-
tient module b/a where a and b are two left-ideals of A such that «c (&gt;, Every quotient
module of a monogenous A-module is monogenous.

The second assertion is immediate and the first follows from Proposition 22
and I, § 4, no. 6, Theorem 4.

Note on the other hand that a submodule of a monogenous module is
not necessarily monogenous. For example, if A is a commutative ring in
which there exist non-principal ideals (VII, § 1, no. 1), these ideals are
non-monogenous submodules of the monogenous A-module A.

It follows from the definitions that a submodule of an A-module E gener-
ated by a family (a t ) of elements of E is the sum of the monogenous submodules

220



CHANGE OF RING OF SCALARS § 1.13

Afl t of E; for (a t ) to be a basis of E, it is necessary and sufficient that each of
the a l be a. free element of E and that the sum of the Aa t be direct.

Proposition 23. Let E be an A-module, the direct sum of an infinite family (M t ) leI
of non-zero submodules. For every generating system So/E, Card(S) ^ Card (I).

For all x e S, let C x be the finite set of indices i e I such that the component
of x in M t is ^0 and let G = U C*. Every x e S belongs by definition to the

X G S

submodule of E the direct sum of the M t for i e C and the hypothesis that S
generates E implies therefore that C = I; as I is by hypothesis infinite, so is
S (Set Theory, III, §5, no. 1, Corollary 1 to Proposition 1); therefore
Card(I) = Card(C) ^ Card(S) {Set Theory, III, § 6, no. 3, Corollary 3 to
Theorem 2).

Corollary 1. Under the hypotheses of Proposition 23, suppose that each M t is
monogenous and that E is the direct sum of a second family (N^)^ eL of non-zero mono-
genous submodules. Then Card(L) = Card (I).

If b K is a generator of N K , the set of b K is a generating system of E, hence
Card(L) ^ Card (I). In particular L is infinite and, exchanging the roles of
(M t ) and (N K ), similarly Card(I) ^ Card(L), whence the corollary.

Corollary 2. If a module E admits an infinite basis B, every generating system of
E has cardinal ^ Card(B) and every basis ofEis equipotent to B.

13. CHANGE OF RING OF SCALARS

Let A, B be two rings and p a homomorphism of the ring B into the ring A.
For every A-module E, the external law ((3, x) h-&gt; p((3)# defines (with addition)
a B-module structure said to be associated with p and the A-module structure
on E; this B-module is denoted by p*(E) or E [B] (and even simply E if no
confusion can arise). In particular, if B is a subring of A and p:B-&gt; A is the
canonical injection, E [B] is called the B-module obtained by restricting the
ring of scalars A to B; by an abuse of language, this expression is also used
when the homomorphism p is arbitrary.

If F is a submodule of the A-module E, p^F) is a submodule of p*(E) and
p*(E/F) is equal to p He (E)/p sN (F).

Let E, F be two A-modules ; every A-linear mapping u : E — &gt; F is also a
B-linear mapping E [B] -&gt; F [B] denoted by p*(u); in other words, there is a
canonical injection of Z-modules

(47) Hom A (E, F) -&gt; Hom B (E [B] , F [B] ).

This mapping is not necessarily bijective; in other words a B-linear
mapping E [BJ —&gt; F [B3 is not necessarily A-linear. For example, a sub-B-
module of E [B] is not necessarily a sub- A-module of E : if A is a field and B

221



n LINEAR ALGEBRA

a subfield of A, the vector subspace B s of the vector B-space (A S ) [B) is not a
vector sub-A-space if B ^ A.

It is immediate that, for every family (E t ), 6l of A-modules, the B-module

P*(I1 E t ) (resp. p«(® E t )) is equal to FI p,(E0 (resp. © p^E,)).

Every generating system of p*(E) is a generating system of E but the con-
verse is not necessarily true.

Proposition 24. Let A, B be two rings and p : B -&gt; A a ring homomorphism.

(i) If p w surjective, the canonical mapping (47) is bijective. For every A-module E,
every sub-B-module of p*(E) is a sub-A-module ofE; every generating system o/"E
is a generating system of p*(E).

(ii) If $ is injective, every free family in the A-module E is a free family in the
B-module p*(E).

The proposition follows immediately from the definitions.

Note that even if p is injective, a free family in p*(E) is not necessarily free
inE.

Tor example, 1 and -\/2 do not form a free system in R considered
as a vector R-space, although they form a free system in R considered as
a vector Q-space (cf. Remark 1).*

Proposition 25. Let A, B be two rings, p : B -&gt; A a ring homomorphism and E
an A-module. Let (a x )^ 6L oe a generating system (resp. free family of elements, basis)
of A considered as a left B-module. Let (a^em be a generating system {resp. free family
of elements, basis) of the A-module E. Then (a^flu) (A , &gt;u)6LxM is a generating system
(resp. {when p is injective) free family of elements, basis) of the B-module p*(E).

If x = 2, y^u, where y u e A and (a*,) is a generating system of A, we may

lie M

write y u = 2, pCPxJa*, with p„ w e B, for all jjl e M, whence x = 2, p(0xn)*x«»
On the other hand, if (aj and (aj are free families, a relation

2 pfaxuKflu = 0, with p Xll eB, may be written J^ ( 1^ p(p Xtl )a x )a (t = 0;

it thus implies Z, pfl^Ja* = for all [x e M and therefore fi klx = for all
X, y. if p is injective.

Corollary. If A is a finitely generated left B-module and E a finitely generated left
A-module, p*(E) is a finitely generated left A-module.

Let C be a third ring, p' : C -*- B a ring homomorphism and p" = pop' the
composite homomorphism. It follows immediately from the definitions that

222



tion 2L, £ t * f = with £ t e K, the £, not all zero, it would follow that for all



CHANGE OF RING OF SCALARS § 1.13

p*(E) = p*(p # (E)) for every A-module E. In particular, if p is an isomorphism
of B onto A, then E = p*(p*(E)), where p' denotes the inverse isomorphism
of p.

Remarks. (1) Let K be a field and A a subring of K with the following pro-
perty: for every finite family (5)) 1&lt;Un of elements of K, there exists a ye A
which is non-zero and such that y£ f e A for 1 ^ i ^ n (a hypothesis which
is always satisfied when A is commutative and K is the field of fractions of A).
Let E be a vector space over K and E [A] the A-module obtained by restricting
the ring of scalars to A. Then, if a family (x x )^ eIj is free in E [A] it is also free in E.

Attention may be confined to the case where L = (1, ft); if there were a reta-
il

2

P e A, 2&lt; (P£i)*i = 0. By hypothesis we can suppose (3 # in A such that

n

P^, = &lt;Xj belongs to A for all i; but the relation Z, cn i x i = is contrary to the

hypothesis, the &lt;Xj being not all zero.

(2) If the ring homomorphism p:B-&gt; A is surjective and b is its kernel
(so that A is canonically identified with B/b), then, for every A-module E,
b is contained in the annihilator of p*(E) and E is the A-module derived from
p # (E) by the process defined in no. 12.

Let A, B be two rings and p : B -&gt; A a homomorphism. Let E be an A-module
and F a B-module; a B-linear mapping u:F -&gt; p*(E) (also called a B-linear
mapping of F into E if no confusion arises) is also called a semi-linear mapping
(relative to p) of the B-module F into the A-module E; it is also said that the
ordered pair (w, p) is a dimorphism of F into E; this therefore means that,
for x e F, y e F and (3 e B,

f 4 oN /«(* + y) = «(*) + &lt;y)

K } W*) = p(PM*).

The set Hom B (F, p*(E)) of B-linear mappings of F into E is also written
as Hom B (F, E) if no confusion can arise.

When p is an isomorphism of B onto A, the relation u($x) = p($)u(x) for all
|3 eB may also be written as u{p'(a)x) = ax for all ae A, where p' denotes
the inverse isomorphism of p ; to say that u is semi-linear for p is then equivalent
to saying that u is an A-linear mapping of p*(F) into E.

Example. It has been seen (no. 1) that a homothety h a : x &gt;-&gt; olx on an A-module
E is not necessarily a linear mapping. But if a is invertible, h a is a semi-linear
mapping (which is moreover bijective) relative to the inner automorphism

\ h-&gt; &lt;x£a -1 of A, for a(X#) = (aXa _1 )(aAr).

223



n LINEAR ALGEBRA

Let C be a third ring, p' : G -&gt; B a homomorphism and G a C-module. If
v:G-&gt; F is a semi-linear mapping relative to p', the composition w = u o v
is a semi-linear mapping ofG into E relative to the homomorphism p" = p o p\
If p is an isomorphism and u : F -&gt; E is a bijective semi-linear mapping relative to
p, the inverse mapping u' : E -&gt; F is a semi-linear mapping relative to the inverse
isomorphism p':A -&gt; B of p.

It is thus seen that, for the species of structure defined by giving on an
ordered pair (A, E) of sets a ring structure on A and a left A-module structure
on E, the dimorphisms (u, cj&gt;) can be taken as morphisms (Set Theory, IV, § 2,
no. 1) ; we shall always assume in what follows that this choice of morphisms
has been made.

Remark (3). Let A 1} A 2 be two rings, A = A x x A 2 their product and let
e x = (1,0), e 2 = (0, 1) in A, so that Aj and A 2 are canonically identified
with the two-sided ideals Ae x and Ae 2 of A. For every A-module E, eJL and
£ 2 E are sub-A-modules Ej, E 2 of E, annihilated respectively by e 2 and e lt
so that, canonically identifying A/Ae 2 with A x and AjAe x with A 2 , E x (resp.
E 2 ) is given an Aj-module (resp. A 2 -module) structure. Moreover, E is the
direct sum of E x and E 2 , for every *eE can be written as x — e x x + e 2 x and
the relation e x x — e 2 y implies e x x = e\x = e x e 2 y = 0. Conversely, for every
ordered pair consisting of an Aj-module F x and an A 2 -module F 2 , let E x be
the A-module (p x ) # (Fj), E 2 the A-module (p 2 ) + (F 2 ), p x and/&gt; 2 being the
projections of A onto A x and A 2 respectively; then in the A-module
E = E x © E 2 , E x = e^i, E 2 = ^ 2 E. The study of A-modules is thus reduced
to that of Aj-modules and that of A 2 -modules. In particular, every submodule
M of E is of the form M x © M 2 , where M x = e x M and M 2 = e 2 M.

14. MULTIMODULES

Let A, B be two rings and consider on a set E two left module structures with
the same additive law and whose ring of operators are respectively A and B;
let $ be the endomorphism ring of the additive group E and for all a e A
(resp. (3 e B) let A a (resp. h$) denote the element x i-&gt; ax (resp. x \-+ |3#) of $ .
Clearly the three following properties are equivalent: (a) h v o h' &amp; = h'^ ° h a
for all a and (3; (b) the image of A under the homomorphism a t-&gt; h a is con-
tained in Hom B (E, E) ; (c) the image of B under the homomorphism (3 &gt;-&gt; h' fi
is contained in Hom A (E, E). When the A-module (resp. B-module) structure
in question is a right module structure, the ring A (resp. B) must be replaced
in (b) (resp. (c)) by A (resp. B°). The above properties can be expressed by
saying that the two (left or right) module structures defined on E are compatible.

Definition 13. Let (A K ) Kelj , (B^gjj be two families of rings ; an ((A^), (B u ))-
multimodule (or multimodule over the families of rings (A^) XeL , (B w ) lieM ) is a set E
with, for each X e L, a left A K -module structure and, for each [x e M, a right B w -
module structure, all these module structures being compatible with one another.

224



MULTIMODULES § 1.14

When the family (B w ) (resp. (A K )) is empty, E is called a left (resp. right)
multimodule. When Card(L) + Card(M) = 2, we say "bimodule" instead of
"multimodule"; it is then often convenient to consider (as can always be done
by replacing a ring of operators by its opposite, cf. no. 1) a bimodule as having
a left module structure with respect to a ring A and a right module structure with
respect to a ring B, the permutability of the laws then being expressed by the
relation

(49) &lt;x(*p) = (a*) p for x e E, a e A, p e B.

It is then also said that E is an (A, B)-bimodule.

Two multimodule structures on a set E are said to be compatible if all the
module structures on E which define one or the other of these multimodule
structures are compatible with one another.

Examples. (1) On a ring A the module structures of A s and A d are com-
patible and A can therefore be considered canonical ly as an (A, A) -bimo-
dule.

(2) A left A-module E has a canonical left module structure over the
ring End A (E) and the A-module and End A (E)-module structures on E
are compatible.

Clearly when E is a multimodule over two families {A K ) Xehi (B W ) U6M of
rings, E is also a multimodule over any two subfamilies (A X ) X6L , (B^veM't
where the A x -module and B^-module structures for XeL' and fjt, e M' are
those initially given.

Since multimodules are particular examples of commutative groups with
operators, the results of nos. 2 to 10 (cf. no. 10, Remark) can be applied to
them; in particular, if E, F are two ((A x ), (B u )) -multimodules, a homomor-
phism u: E-»F is a mapping which is an A^-homomorphism for all XeL
and a Bn-homomorphism for all u. e M. The stable subgroups of an ((A x ), (BJ)-
multimodule are ((A x ), (BJ) -multimodules (called submultimodules) , as also
are the quotients by such subgroups (called quotient multimodules)', similarly
for products and direct sums.

Let E be an ((A x ), (BJ) -multimodule and for each XeL (resp. (xeM)
let &lt;|&gt; x :A x -» A x (resp. &lt;fv Bu-&gt;BJ be a ring homomorphism; clearly the
Ax-module structures associated with the § K and the A^-module structures
given on E and the B^-module structures associated with the &lt;J/ W and the
B x -module structures given on E are compatible with one another and hence
define on E an ((AJ,), (B^)) -multimodule structure, said to be associated with
the given ((A x ), (BJ) -multimodule structure and the &lt;j&gt; x and &lt;j^.

If E, F are two ((A x ), (B w )) -multimodules, the additive group of homomorph-
isms of E into F is denoted by Hom (Ax)(Bii) (E, F) (or simply Hom(E, F)).
Formulae (6) to (8) of no. 2 are obviously valid for ((A x ), (B w )) -multimodule
homomorphisms and, in particular, Hom(E, E) = End(E) has a ring structure;

225



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

moreover Hom(E, F) has a canonical left End (F) -module structure and
right End(E)-module structure, these two structures being compatible; in
other words, Hom(E, F) has a canonical (End(F), End(E)) -bimodule structure.

Suppose now that E has a multimodule structure whose rings of left (resp.
right) operators are on the one hand the A x for X 6 L (resp. the B w for (j. e M)
and on the other the rings of another family (A x .)v el / (resp. (B^) U ,. M ,).
Suppose similarly that F has a multimodule structure whose rings of left
(resp. right) operators are on the one hand the A x for X e L (resp. the B u
for pteM) and on the other the rings of another family (A£») X . 6L „ (resp.
(BJO^smO ; to abbreviate we shall say that E is an ((A x ), (A x .) ; (B u ), (B£ ))-
multimodule and F an ((A x ), (AJ-) ; (BJ, (BJ.)) -multimodule. Consider E and
F as ((A x ), (B w ))-muitimodules, thus restricting the operators to the subfamilies
(A x ) and (BJ. By what was said at the beginnings of this no., the multimodule
structures given on E and F define canonically ring homomorphisms

A£. -&gt; End (Ax)((IV (E), Bj -&gt; End (AA) . av (E),

K» -» End (A0((Bll) (F), BJ. -&gt; End (A , )&gt;(Bu) (F) ;

moreover, two elements of End (AxMBli) (E) (resp. End (AO((B(l) (F)) respective
images of elements of two distinct rings among the A! v or the B' w ° (resp. the
A£» or the B™) are permutable; it follows that the above homomorphisms
define on Hom (Ax)&gt;(Blt) (E, F) a multimodule structure whose rings of left operators
are the A£. (X" e L'ji and the B;. (\j! e M') and whose rings of right operators
are the A x . (X' e L') and the B"»» ((x" e M").

If now E' is an ((AJ, (A x ,); (BJ, (B^)) -multimodule and F' an
((A x ), (AJ-); (BJ, (B^))-multimodule, Hom (Ax)t(Bu) (E', F') is an

((AJ-), (K')- (AW, (B^))-multimodule;

if w : E' -&gt; E, » : F -&gt; F' are multimodule homomorphisms,

Hom(«, v) :Hom (AOt(Bli) (E, F) -&gt; Hom (Ax)((B(t) (E', F')

is defined as in no. 2 and is a multimodule homomorphism.

Remarks. (1) Let F be an A-module and C the centre of the ring A; as central
homotheties commute with all homotheties, F has a bimodule structure whose
rings of left operators are A and C. If E is another A-module, Hom A (E, F)
has therefore a canonical C-module structure (where, for/e Hom A (E, F) and
yeC, y/is the homomorphism x^yf(x)); if E', F' are two A-modules,
m:E'-&gt;E, z&gt;:F-&gt;-F' two A-homomorphisms, the mapping Hom(«, ») is
C-linear.

(2) Let E be a left A-module; as A has a canonical (A, A)-bimodule struc-
ture, so has the direct sum A (T) for any indexing set T; by the above,

226



PROPERTIES OF Hom A (E, F) RELATIVE TO EXACT SEQUENCES § 2.1

Hom A (A* T) , E) has a canonical left A-module structure arising from the right
A-module structure on A ( S T) : for/ 6 Hom A (A ( s T) , E) and a g A, a/ is the linear
mapping x h+f(x&lt;x). Corollary 2 to Proposition 17 of no. 11 defines a canonical
mapping^ T from the product module E T to Hom A (Af } , E), the image under
j E&gt;T of a family (x t ) teT being the linear mapping /: A&lt; T) -&gt; E such that
f(e t ) == x t for all t e T (where (e t ) is the canonical basis of A&lt; T) ) ; it is known
(loc. cit.) that j E , T is bijective and it follows from the definition given above of the
A-module structure on Hom A (A&lt; T) , E) that j E&gt; T is A-linear. Finally, if u: E -&gt; F
is an A-module homomorphism, the diagram



(50)



E t JL1+ Hom A (A ( s T) , E)



Hom(l,u)



F T — -&gt; Hom A (A ( 8 T) , F)

Jf.t



is commutative.



Note that when T consists of a single element, j E : E -&gt; Hom A ( A s , E) is
just the mapping xt-&gt; Q x defined in no. 2, Example 1.



§ 2. MODULES OF LINEAR MAPPINGS. DUALITY

1. PROPERTIES OF Hom A (E, F) RELATIVE TO EXACT SEQUENCES

Theorem 1 . Let Abe a ring, E', E, E" three A-modules and u : E' -+ E, v : E -&gt; E"
two homomorphisms. For the sequence

(1) E' -% E -% E* — &gt;

to be exact, it is necessary and sufficient that, for every A-module F, the sequence

( 2 ) — &gt; Hom(E", F) -% Hom(E, F) -^U Hom(E', F)

(where u = Hom(a, 1 P ), v = Hom(y, 1 F )) be exact.

Suppose that sequence (1) is exact. If w e Hom(E", F) and v(w) = w o v = 0,
then w = since v is surjective. Sequence (2) is therefore exact at Hom(E", F).
We show that it is exact at Hom(E, F). u o v = Hom(o o u, 1 P ) (§ 1, no. 2,
formula (10)) and v°u = since sequence (1) is exact at E. Therefore
u o v = 0, that is Im(y) &lt;= Ker(«). On the other hand, if w eKer(w), then
w o u = and hence Ker(o&gt;) =&gt; Im(a). But as sequence (1) is exact at E,
Im(w) = Ker(t/) and hence Ker(«;) =&gt; Ker(z)) ; as v is surjective, it follows
from § 1, no. 3, Remark that there exists a a)'eHom(E",F) such that

227



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

w = w' o v = v(w'). Therefore Ker(«) &lt;= Im(z/), which completes the proof
that sequence (2) is exact.

Conversely, suppose that (2) is exact for every A-module F. As
u o v = Hom(» o u, 1 F ) = 0, w o v o u = for every homomorphism w : E" -&gt; F.
Taking F = E" and a; = 1 E », it is seen first that v ° u = and hence
m(E') c Ker(o). Now take F = Coker(w) and let &lt;j&gt;:E^F = E/»(E') be the
canonical mapping. Then £(&lt;$&gt;) =&lt;j)oa = by definition and hence there
exists a &lt;J&gt; eHom(E", F) such that &lt;j&gt; = v(ty) = ty ° v; this obviously implies
m(E') = Ker(^)) ^ Ker(y), which proves that sequence (1) is exact at E.
Finally, let be the canonical homomorphism of E" onto F = E"/z&gt;(E) ; then
y(0) = o v = 0, hence = 0; therefore, F = {0} and v is surjective. Sequence
(1) is therefore exact at E".

Corollary. For an A-linear mapping m:E-3-F to be surjective (resp. bijective,
resp. zero), it is necessary and sufficient that, for every A-module G, the mapping
Hom(tt, 1 G ) :Hom(F, G) -&gt; Hom(E, G) be injective (resp. bijective, resp. zero).

It suffices to apply Theorem 1 to the case where E" = {0} (resp. E' = {0}
resp. E" = E and v = 1 E ).

Note that starting from an exact sequence

&gt; E' -^-&gt; E — U- E* &gt;

the corresponding sequence

&gt; Hom(E", F) — U- Hom(E, F) -^-» Hom(E', F) &gt;

is not necessarily exact, in other words, the homomorphism u is not necessarily
surjective. If E' is identified with a submodule of E, this means that a linear
mapping of E' into F cannot always be extended to a linear mapping of E
into F (Exercises 11 and 12). However:

Proposition 1. If the exact sequence of linear mappings

(3) — &gt; E' A E A E' — &gt;
splits (in other words, if m(E') is a direct factor of E) the sequence

(4) o — &gt; Hom(E", F) -U Hom(E, F) ^-&gt; Hom(E', F) — &gt;

is exact and splits. Conversely, if, for every A-module F, sequence (4) is exact, sequence (3)
splits.

If the exact sequence (3) splits, there exists a linear retraction m':E-^E'
associated with u (§ 1, no. 9, Proposition 15) ; if

u' = Hom(u', 1 P ) :Hom(E', F) -&gt; Hom(E, F),
228



PROPERTIES OF Hom A (E, F) RELATIVE TO EXACT SEQUENCES § 2.1

the fact that u' o u is the identity implies that u ° u' is the identity (§ 1, no. 2,
formula (10)) and hence the first assertion follows from § 1, no. 9, Proposition
15. Conversely, suppose sequence (4) is exact for F = E'. Then there exists an
element/e Hom(E, E') such that/ o u — 1 E &lt;, and the conclusion follows from
§ 1, no. 9, Proposition 15.

Note that the first assertion of Proposition 1 can also be considered as a
special case of § 1, no. 6, Corollary 1 to Proposition 6, canonically
identifying Hom(E', F) Hom(E", F) with Hom(E' E", F) by means
of the Z-linear mapping Hom(/&gt;', 1 F ) + Hom(/»", 1 F ), where
/:E'@E"-&gt; E' and p":YJ E" -&gt; E" are the canonical projections.

Theorem 2. Let Abe a ring, F', F, F" three A-modules and «:F' -&gt; F, v:F -&gt; F"
two homomorphisms. For the sequence

(5) — &gt; F' -^ F -?-&gt; F"



to be exact, it is necessary and sufficient that, for every A-module E, the sequence

(6) — &gt; Hom(E 3 F) -^&gt; Hom(E, F) -U Hom(E, F")

(where u = Hom(l E , u), v = Hom(l E , v)) be exact.

Suppose that the sequence (5) is exact. Note first that

v o u = Hom(l E , v ° u) =

(II, § 1, no. 2, formula (10)) since v o u = 0. The image of Hom(E, F') under
u is therefore contained in the kernel N of v; let fbe the homomorphism of
the Z-module Hom(E, F') into N whose graph is equal to that of u; it is neces-
sary to prove that f is bijective and hence to define a mapping
g:N-&gt;-Hom(E, F') such that f°g and g of are the identity mappings. For
this, let w be an element of N, that is a linear mapping w : E — &gt;- F such that
v o w = 0. The latter relation is equivalent to w(E) &lt;= Ker(y) = m(F') by
hypothesis, hence, since u is injective, there exists one and only one linear
mapping w' : E -&gt; F' such that w = u ° w' and we take g(w) = w' ; it is immedi-
ately verified that g satisfies the desired conditions.

Conversely, suppose that sequence (6) is exact for every A-module E.
As Hom(l E , v ° u) = v o u = 0, then v o u ° w = for every homomorphism
w:E —&gt; F'. Taking E = F' and w — \ ¥ &gt;, it is seen first that v ou = and
hence w(F') c: Ker(y). Now we take E = Ker(y) and let (|&gt;:E-^F be the
canonical injection. Then v{§) = v ° &lt;}&gt; = by definition and hence there
exists &lt;\&gt; G Hom(E, F') such that &lt;j&gt; = u(^) = u o ^, which obviously implies
Ker(z&gt;) cz w(F') and completes the proof of the exactness of (5) at F. Finally,
if 8 is the identity mapping of Ker«, then «(0) =0, hence 6 = and
Ker u = {0}, which proves the exactness of (5) at F'.

229



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Remark. (1) Theorem 2 allows us, for every submodule F' of F, to identify
Hom(E, F') with a sub-Z-module of Hom(E, F). When this identification
is made, then, for every family (M*) of submodules of F

Hom(E, Q M„) = Q Hom(E, M K )
for if u e Hom(E, F) belongs to each of the Hom(E, M„), then, for all
xeE, u(x) e M*. for all X and hence u maps E into fj M x .

Corollary. For an A-linear mapping u : E -&gt; F to be injective, it is necessary and suffi-
cient that, for every A-module G, the mapping Hom(l G , u) : Hom(G, E) -&gt; Hom(G, F)
be injective.

It suffices to apply Theorem 2 to the case where F' = {0}.

Starting from an exact sequence

&gt; F -^&gt; F -^-» F" &gt;

the corresponding sequence

— * Hom(E, F) -% Hom(E, F) -U Hom(E, F") &gt;

is not necessarily exact, in other words v is not necessarily surjective. If F'
is identified with a submodule of F and F* with the quotient module
F/F', this means that a linear mapping of E into F" is not necessarily of
the form vow, where w is a linear mapping of E into F. However:

Proposition 2. If the exact sequence

(7) — &gt; F -^ F -U F" — &gt;
splits (in other words, if k(F') is a direct factor of F), the sequence

( 8) o — * Hom(E, F) -^ Hom(E, F) -^&gt; Hom(E, F") — &gt;

is exact and splits. Conversely, if sequence (8) is exact for every A-module E, the exact
sequence (7) splits.

The first assertion follows from the fact that

Hom(E, F) Hom(E, F")

is canonically identified with Hom(E, F F") by means of the Z-linear
mapping Hom(W) + Hom(l E ,/), j':F -&gt;F F and/:F -&gt;F © F"
being the canonical injections (§ 1, no. 6, Corollary 1 to Proposition 6). Con-
versely, if sequence (8) is exact for E = F", there is an element g e Hom(F", F)
such that vog = 1 P „ and the conclusion follows from § 1, no. 9, Proposition
15.

230



PROJECTIVE MODULES § 2.2

Remark (2). The results of this no. are valid without modification for all
commutative groups with operators.



2. PROJECTIVE MODULES

Definition 1. An A-module P is called projective if, for every exact sequence
F' -» F -&gt; F" of A-linear mapping, the sequence

Hom(P, F) -&gt; Hom(P, F) -» Hom(P, F")
is exact.

Proposition 3. For an A-module P, the direct sum of a family of submodules (M t ),
to be projective, it is necessary and sufficient that each of the M t be projective.

For every A-module homomorphism u : E -&gt; F,

Hom(l P5 u) :Hom(P, E) -» Hom(P, F)

is identified with 1 I Hom(l Mtf u) (§ 1, no. 6, Corollary 1 to Proposition 6) ; the
conclusion thus follows from Definition 1 and § 1, no. 5, Proposition 5 (ii).

Corollary. Every free A-module is projective.

It suffices by Proposition 3 to show that A s is projective, which follows
immediately from the commutativity of diagram (50) of § 1, no. 14.

Proposition 4. Let P be an A-module. The following properties are equivalent:

(a) P is projective.

(b) For every exact sequence 0-&gt;F'-&gt;F-&gt;F"-&gt;0 of A-linear mappings, the
sequence

-&gt; Hom(P, F) -&gt; Hom(P, F) -» Hom(P, F") -&gt;

is exact.

(c) For every surjective A-module homomorphism u : E — &gt; E* and every homomorphism
jf:P— *&gt;E", there exists a homomorphism g:P— »- E such that f = uog (it is said

that/ can be "lifted" to a homomorphism of P into E).

(d) Every exact sequence 0-&gt;E'-&gt;E—&gt;-P-*-0 of A-linear mappings splits (and
therefore P is isomorphic to a direct factor of E).

(e) P is isomorphic to a direct factor of a free A-module.

It is trivial that (a) implies (b). To see that (b) implies (c), it suffices to

apply (b) to the exact sequence 0-&gt;E'-&gt;E-4E'-^0, where E' = Ker(w),
since (c) expresses the fact that

Hom(l P , u) :Hom(P, E) -&gt; Hom(P, E")

is surjective. To see that (c) implies (d), it suffices to apply (c) to the surjective

231



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

homomorphism z&gt;:E-»P and the homomorphism 1 P :P-&gt;P; the existence
of a homomorphism g:P -&gt; E such that 1 P = v o g implies that the sequence

— &gt; E' &gt; E -^ P — &gt;

splits (§ 1, no. 9, Proposition 15). As for every A-module M there exist a free
A-module L and an exact sequence 0-&gt;R-»L-&gt;-M-&gt;0(§l, no. 1 1, Propo-
sition 20), clearly (d) implies (e). Finally (e) implies (a) by virtue of Proposition
3 and its Corollary.

Corollary 1 . For an A-module to be projective and finitely generated, it is necessary
and sufficient that it be a direct factor of a free A-module with a finite basis.

The condition is obviously sufficient; conversely, a finitely generated pro-
jective module E is isomorphic to a quotient of a free module F with a finite
basis (§ 1, no. 11) and E is isomorphic to a direct factor of F by virtue of Pro-
position 4 (d).

Corollary 2. Let C be a commutative ring and E, F two finitely generated projec-
tive C-modules; then Hom c (E, F) is a finitely generated projective C-module.

It may be assumed that there are two finitely generated free C-modules
M, N such that M = E © E', N = F © F'; it follows from § 1, no. 6, Corollary
1 to Proposition 6 that Hom c (M, N) is finitely generated and free and on the
other hand that Hom c (M, N) is isomorphic to

Hom (E, F) © Hom c (E', F) © Hom c (E, F) © Hom(E', F),

whence the corollary.

3. LINEAR FORMS; DUAL OF A MODULE

Let E be a left A-module. As A is an (A, A)-bimodule, Hom A (E, A s ) has a
canonical right A-module structure (§ 1, no. 14).

Definition 2. For every right A-module E, the right A-module Hom A (E, A g ) is
called the dual module of E (or simply the dual\ of E) and its elements are called
the linear forms on E.

If E is a right A-module, the set Hom A (E, A d ) with its canonical left A-
module structure is likewise called the dual of E and its elements are called
linear forms on E.



f In Topological Vector Spaces, TV, we shall define, for vector spaces with a topo-
logy, a notion of "dual space" which will depend on this topology and will be dis-
tinct from the one defined here. The reader must beware of incautiously applying
to the "topological" dual space the properties of the "algebraic" dual which are
established in this paragraph.

232



LINEAR FORMS; DUAL OF A MODULE § 2.3

In this chapter, E* will be used to denote the dual of a (left or right) A-
module E.

Example. *On the vector space (with respect to the field R) of continuous
real-valued functions on an interval (a, 6) of R, the mapping
x i-&gt;- J* x(t )dt is a linear form.*

Let E be a left A-module and E* its dual; for every ordered pair of elements
x e E, x* e E*, the element x*(x) of A is denoted by &lt;*, #*&gt;. Then the rela-
tions

(9) &lt;* + y, **&gt; = &lt;*, **&gt; + &lt;y, **&gt;

(10) &lt;*, x* + y*&gt; = &lt;*, **&gt; + (x, y*&gt;

(11) &lt;o*, **&gt; = a&lt;*, **&gt;

(12) &lt;*, **a&gt; = &lt;*, **&gt;a

hold for at, y in E, #*, y* in E* and a e A. The mapping (x, x*) i-* (x, **&gt; of
E x E* into A is called the canonical bilinear form on E x E* (the notion of
bilinear form will be defined generally in IX, § 1). Every linear form x* on
E can be considered as the partial mapping x h-&gt; &lt;#, #*&gt; corresponding to the
canonical bilinear form.

When E is a right A-module, the value ** (x) of a linear form x* e E*
at an element x e E is denoted by &lt;#*, x&gt; and the formulae corresponding
to (11) and (12) are written as

&lt;#*, *&lt;x&gt; = &lt;#*, #&gt;a

&lt;ax*, *&gt; = a&lt;#*, x&gt;.

When A is commutative, either notation is permissible.

Proposition 5. For every ring A, the mapping which associates with every £ e A
the linear form yj i-&gt; •/)!; on A s is an isomorphism ofA d onto the dual qfA s .

It is the particular case of the canonical isomorphism E -&gt; Hom A (A s , E)
of § 1, no. 14, Remark 2, corresponding to E = A s ; the commutativity of dia-
gram (50) of § 1, no. 14, shows that we have here an isomorphism of right A-
modules.

If A d is identified with the dual of A s by means of the isomorphism of
Proposition 5, the canonical bilinear form on A s x A d is then expressed by

(13) &lt;2U*&gt; = ^* for 1,1* in A.

Similarly, the dual of A d is canonically identified with A s , the canonical
bilinear form on A d x A s being expressed by

(14) &lt;$*,£&gt; = $*£ for 5,5* in A.

233



LINEAR ALGEBRA



4. ORTHOGONALITY



Definition 3. Let E be an A-module and E* its dual; an element x e E and an
element «*eE* are called orthogonal if (x, x*y = 0.

A subset M of E and a subset M' of E* are called orthogonal sets if, for all
x g M, x* e M', x and x* are orthogonal. In particular, x*gE* (resp. xeE)
is called orthogonal to M (resp. M') if it is orthogonal to every element of M
(resp. M'). If** and y* axe orthogonal to M, so is x* + y* and x*a. for all
a e A by virtue of ( 1 0) and (12) (no. 3) , which justifies the following definition :

Definition 4. Given a subset MofE (resp. a subset M' ofE*), the set of x* e E*
(resp. the set of x e E) which are orthogonal to M (resp. M') is called the submodule
totally orthogonal to M (resp. M') (or simply the submodule orthogonal to M
(resp. M') if no confusion can arise).

By definition of a linear form, the submodule of E* orthogonal to E is
reduced to 0; the submodule of E* orthogonal to {0} is identical with E*.

Proposition 6. Let M, N be two subsets of E such that M c N; t/ M' and N'
are the submodules ofE* orthogonal to M and N respectively, then N' &lt;= M'.

Proposition 7. Let (M t ) be a family of subsets ofE; the submodule orthogonal to
the union of the M t is the intersection of the submodules M[ which are respectively
orthogonal to the M t ; this submodule is also the submodule orthogonal to the submodule
of E generated by the union of the M t .

These results are immediate consequences of the definitions.

There is an analogous proposition (which we shall leave to the reader to
state) for submodules ofE orthogonal to subsets ofE*.

If M is a submodule of E, M' the submodule of E* orthogonal to M and
M" the submodule of E orthogonal to M', then M c: M" but it may be
that M ^ M" (Exercise 9). Note however that if M* is the orthogonal of
M" in E*, then M" = M'; for M' &lt;= M* and on the other hand the rela-
tion M &lt;= M* implies M* &lt;= M'.

5. TRANSPOSE OF A LINEAR MAPPING

Let E, F be two left A-modules; for every linear mapping u:E -&gt; F, the map-
ping Hom(«, l As ) is a linear mapping of the right A-module F* into the
right A-module E* (§1, no. 2), called the transpose of u.
In other words :

Definition 5. For every linear mapping u of an A-module E into an A-module F,
the linear mapping y* ^y* °u of the dual F*of¥ into the dual E* of E is called
the transpose ofu and is denoted by l u.

234



TRANSPOSE OF A LINEAR MAPPING § 2.5

The transpose *u is therefore defined by the relation

(15) &lt;«(*), y*&gt; = &lt;x, *»(y*)&gt; for all x e E and all y* e F*.

Definition 5 applies without alteration to right A-modules and is then
equivalent to the relation

&lt;y*, «(*)&gt; = &lt;*«(y*)» *&gt; for all * e E and all y* e F*.
Formulae (9) and (10) of § 1, no. 2 here give

(16) *( Bl + U 2 ) = *«! + *« 2

for two elements u 1} u 2 of Hom A (E, F) and

(17) '(son) = *uo*0

for k e Hom A (E, F) and v e Hom A (F, G), G being a third A-module; finally,
clearly

(1.8) *1. = 1 B ..

Remark. From (17) and (18) it follows that if u is left (resp. right) invertible,
*u is right (resp. left) invertible.

Proposition 8. Let m:E-&gt;F be an A-linear mapping, M a submodule of E and
M! the orthogonal of M in E* ; the orthogonal of w(M) in F* w ffo inverse image

This follows immediately from (15).

Corollary. Tfo orthogonal of the image u(E) in F* is the kernel t u~ 1 (0) of'u.

The orthogonal of E in E* is 0.

If u : E -&gt; F is an isomorphism, l u : F* -&gt; E* is an isomorphism and if
y:F -&gt; E is the inverse isomorphism of «, *v is the inverse isomorphism of l u
(formulae (17) and (18)).

Definition 6. Given an isomorphism u of an A-module E onto an A-module F, the
transpose of the inverse isomorphism of u (equal to the inverse isomorphism of the
transpose of u) is called the contragredient isomorphism of u and denoted by &amp;.

The isomorphism &amp; is thus characterized by the relation

(19) &lt;«(*), tf(y*)&gt; = &lt;*, **&gt; for x e E, x* e E*.

If v : F -&gt; G is an isomorphism, the contragredient isomorphism of v o «
is j? o #.

In particular, the mapping u i-&gt; tf is an isomorphism of the linear group GL(E)
onto a subgroup of the linear group GL(E*).

235



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Let a: A -&gt; B be an isomorphism of a ring A onto a ring B, E a left A-module,
F a left B-module and k:E-&gt;F a semi-linear mapping (§ 1, no. 13) relative
to a. Let cr -1 be the inverse isomorphism of a; for all y* eF*, the mapping
x *-*- &lt;i/(#),y*&gt; 0-1 of E into A is a linear form; if it is also denoted by *«(#*), a
mapping l u : F* -&gt; E* is defined which is also called the transpose of the semi-
linear mapping u; it is thus characterized by the identity

(20) &lt;«(*),*•&gt; = W&lt;y*)y

for x g E, y* e F*. It is immediately verified that '« is a semi-linear mapping
relative to a' 1 . If v denotes the mapping u considered as an A-linear mapping
of E into ct*(F) (§ 1, no. 13), we may write u — &lt;j&gt; o v, where &lt;{&gt; is the
identity mapping a*(F) -&gt; F, considered as a semi-linear mapping relative
to cr. It is immediate that l u = *v o *(j&gt; and ('&lt;j&gt;, &lt;r -1 ) is a di-isomorphism of F*
onto (a* (F))* relative to the isomorphism cr -1 ; this relation allows us immedi-
ately to extend the properties of transposes of linear mappings to transposes
of semi-linear mappings.

6. DUAL OF A QUOTIENT MODULE. DUAL OF A DIRECT SUM. DUAL BASES

We apply Theorem 1 of no. 1 to the case where F = A s :
Proposition 9. Let E', E, E" be A-modules and

(21) E'^eAe" — &gt;

an exact sequence of linear mappings. Then the sequence of transpose mappings

— &gt; E** -^&gt; E* -^&gt; E'*
is exact.

Corollary. Let M be a submodule of an A-module E and § : E -&gt; E/M the canon-
ical homomorphism. Then *&lt;j&gt; is an isomorphism of the dual of E/M. onto the submodule
M' ofE* orthogonal to M.

If j : M -» E is the canonical injection, the kernel of *j is by definition the
orthogonal of M in E*.

Moreover, in the notation of the corollary, an injective homomorphism
E*/M' — &gt; M* is obtained from *j when passing to the quotient.

Proposition 10. Let (E t ) ieI be a family of A-modules and for all i e I let
j\ : E t -&gt; E = © E t be the canonical injection. Then the product mapping x* *-*■ (^(x*))

is an isomorphism of the dual E*ofE onto the product 1 1 E*.
236



DUAL OF A QUOTIENT MODULE. DUAL OF A DIRECT SUM. DUAL BASES § 2.6

This is a particular case of § 1, no. 6, Corollary 1 to Proposition 6,

applied to the case where 1 1 F*. = A s .

If, by means of the canonical injections j„ the E t are identified with sub-
modules of their direct sum E and if, by means of the product mapping

x* •-* ( ( Ji(**)), E* is identified with il E* it can then be said that 1 1 E*

is the dual of © E t , the canonical bilinear form being given by

(22) &lt;0O, (*?)&gt; = 2 &lt;*„**&gt;.

Corollary. Let M, N be two supplementary submodules in an A-module E and
p:E^&gt;M, q:E -» N the corresponding projectors; then *p + fy:M* © N* -&gt; E*
is an isomorphism and l p (resp. l q) is an isomorphism of M* (resp. N*) onto the
submodule ofE* orthogonal to N (resp. M). Moreover, ifi:M-+E andj:N-+E
are the canonical injections, l poH and t q° t j are the projectors E* -&gt;-'/&gt; (M*),
E* -» ^(N*) corresponding to the decomposition ofE* as the direct sum of ^(M*)

P ° i = 1m&gt; q °j = 1n&gt; poj = qoi = 0, i °p + j o q = 1 B , whence, by
transposition (no. 5, formulae (16), (17) and (18)), H o l p = 1 M ,, *j o *q = 1 N ,,
l j o *p = H o *q = 0. *p o H + t q o *j = 1 E , and the proposition follows from § 1,
no. 6, Corollary 2 to Proposition 6.

Under the hypotheses of the Corollary, M* (resp. N*) is often identified
with the orthogonal ^(M*) (resp. *&lt;7(N*)) of N (resp. M) in E*, thus identi-
fying every linear form u on M (resp. N) with the linear form on E extending
u and which is zero on N (resp. M).

When an A-module E admits a basis (e t ) tsT , it has been seen that giving this
basis defines canonically an isomorphism u:A™ -&gt; E. By virtue of Proposition
10 and no. 3, Proposition 5, the dual of Aj T) is canonically identified with the
product A^; consider the contragredient isomorphism &amp; : A£ -&gt; E*. If, for all
t e T,f t is the element of AJ all of whose projections are zero with the exception
of that of index t, which is equal to 1, and if we write e\ = H(f t ), the elements
e\ ofE* are, by (19) and (22), characterized by the relations

(23) &lt;„*&gt; = {? t'rVu

It amounts to the same to say that, for all x = 2i, % t e t eE, e*(x) = Z, t ;

also e* is called the coordinate form of index t on E. It follows from (23) that
(e*) is a free system in E*.

In particular, if T 'is finite, the e* form a basis ofE*, the/ t then forming the

237



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Proposition 11. The dual of a free module with a basis ofn elements is a free module
with a basis ofn elements.

Note that the dual of a free module with an infinite basis is not neces-
sarily a free module (VII, § 3, Exercise 10).

Definition 7. If E is a free module with a finite basis (e t ), the basis (ef) of the dual
E* ofE defined by relations (23) is called the dual basis of (e t ).

Relations (23) can also be written in the form

(24) &lt;e t) ef,y = B tv

where § tt &gt; is the Kronecker symbol on T x T.

Note that if T is finite and (ef) is the dual basis of (e t ), then, for

(25) &lt;*,**&gt; = t 2 W.

The dual basis of a finite basis of a right A-module is of course defined
similarly.

Corollary. The dual of a finitely generated projective module is a finitely generated
projective module.

A finitely generated projective left A-module can be identified with a direct
factor M of a free A-module A? with a finite basis (no. 2, Corollary 1 to Pro-
position 4). Then (Proposition 11 and Corollary to Proposition 10) M* is iso-
morphic to a direct factor of A3, whence the corollary.

Proposition 12. Let E be an A-module and (a t ) teT a generating system ofE. The
following conditions are equivalent:

(a) E is a projective A-module.

(b) There exists a family {af) te i of linear forms on E such that, for all x e E,
the family «x, a*»t eT has finite support and

(26) x = Z t &lt;*, af&gt;a t .

There exists a surjective homomorphism u : L -&gt;• E, where L = Ag T) , such
that if (e t ) t e T is the canonical basis of L then u(e t ) = a t (§ 1 , no. 1 1 , Proposition
17) ; for E to be projective, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist a linear
mapping v: E -&gt; L such that u o v = 1 E (no. 2, Proposition 4 and § 1, no. 9,
Proposition 15). If such a mapping exists and we write *v(ef) = a*, then
&lt;*, flf &gt; = &lt;x, *%*)&gt; = &lt;v{x), ef}, hence the family «*, af}) has finite sup-

238



BIDUAL § 2.7



port and x = m( 2* &lt;(x), ef}e t j = Z-, &lt;x, «?&gt;a f for all xeE. Conversely, if
condition (b) of the statement is fulfilled, the sum Z, &lt;#, af}e t is defined for all
*eE and x -&gt; 2* &lt;x, a*&gt;£ t is a linear mapping o: E -&gt; L such that aoj= 1 B .



7. BIDUAL

Let E be a left A-module. The dual E** of the dual E* of E is called the
bidual of E; it is also a left A-module (no. 3). For all x e E, it follows from no. 3,
formulae (10) and (12), that the mapping x* \-&gt; &lt;#, #*&gt; is a linear form on the
right A-module E*, in other words an element of the bidual E**, which we
shall denote by x; moreover, it follows immediately from (9) and (11) (no. 3)
that the mapping c%: x &gt;-*• x of E into E** is linear; this mapping will be called
canonical; in general, it is netither injective nor surjective, even when E is
finitely generated (cf. Exercise 9(e) and § 7, no. 5, Theorem 6).

An A-module E is called reflexive if the canonical homomorphism c E :E -&gt; E**
is bijective.

Let F be a second left A-module; for every linear mapping m:E -&gt; F, the
mapping t (*u):E** -*F**, which will also be denoted by tt u, is linear and
the diagram



E &gt; F



(27)



«B



*F



E** &gt;. F**



is commutative, as follows immediately from the definitions and formula (15)
giving the transpose of a linear mapping.

Proposition 13. IfEis a free module (resp. a free module with a finite basis), the
canonical mapping c E :E -&gt; E** is injective (resp. bijective).

Let (e t ) teT be a basis of E and let (ef) be the family of corresponding co-
ordinate forms; by definition, if x e E is such that x = 0, then &lt;#, efy = for
all t e T, in other words all the coordinates of x are zero, hence x = 0. Suppose
further that T is finite; since &lt;£ t , e*} = 8 tt ., (e t ) is the dual basis of (ef) in
E** and, as £ B transforms a basis of E into a basis of E**, c E is bijective (§ 1,
no. 11, Corollary 3 to Proposition 17). We have moreover proved:

Corollary 1. Let E be a free A-module with a finite basis; for every basis (e t ) ofE,
( c E( e t)) w th* dual basis of the basis (ef) ofE* dual to (e t ).

In this case it is said that (e t ) and (ef) are two dual bases of one another.

239



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Corollary 2. If E is a free A-module with a finite basis, every finite basis ofE*
is the dual basis of a basis ofE.

It suffices to consider in E** the dual basis of the given basis and canonically
to identify E with E**.

Corollary 3. Let E, F be two A-modules each with a finite basis, E (resp. F)
being canonically identified with its bidual E** (resp. F**). Then, for every linear
mapping u : E — &gt; F, tt u = u.

This follows immediately from the commutativity of diagram (27).

Corollary A. If J? is a projective module (resp. a finitely generated projective module)
the canonical mapping c P :P -&gt; P** is injective (resp. bijective).

We shall use the following lemma:

Lemma 1 . Let M, N be two supplementary submodules in an A-module E and i : M -&gt; E,
j:N -&gt; E the canonical injections. Then the diagram

M0N CM@ % M**©N**

(28) i+j tti+tt,

y v

E y E**

is commutative.
By definition, for x e M, y e N, z* e E* 5

&lt;«■(«(*) +J(y))&gt; **&gt; = &lt;«(*) +J(y)&gt; ^*&gt;

= &lt;i(x), z*&gt; + &lt;j(y), z*&gt;
= &lt;*,*«(2*)&gt; + &lt;y,y(^)&gt;

= &lt;%W 3 ^*)&gt; + &lt;%(y), t i( 2 *)&gt;

This being so, if E is a free module (resp. a free module with a finite basis),
c E is injective (resp. bijective) ; on the other hand, it follows from no. 6, Pro-
position 10, that tt i © lt j is bijective; the commutativity of diagram (28) then
implies that c u © % is injective (resp. bijective) and so therefore are c u and c N
(§ 1, no. 6, Corollary 1 to Proposition 7), whence the corollary, taking account
of no. 2, Proposition 4.

8. LINEAR EQUATIONS

Let E, F be two A-modules. Every equation of the form u(x) = y Q , where
u:E -» F is a given linear mapping, y a given element of F and the unknown
x is subjected to the condition that it take its values in E, is called a linear

240



LINEAR EQUATIONS § 2.8

equation; y is called the right hand side of the equation; if y = 0, the equation
is called homogeneous linear.

Every element # e E such that u(x ) = y is called a solution of the linear
equation u(x) = y j\

It is often said, loosely speaking, that a problem is linear if it is equivalent
to determining the solutions of a linear equation.

Given a linear equation u(x) = y , the equation u(x) =0 is called the
homogeneous linear equation associated with u(x) = y .

Proposition 14. If x is a solution of the linear equation u(x) = y , the set of solu-
tions of this equation is equal to the set of elements x + z, where z runs through the
set of solutions of the associated homogeneous equation u(x) = 0.

The relation u(x) = y may be written as u(x) = u(x ), which is equivalent

to u(x — x ) = 0.

In other words, if the equation u(x) = y has at least one solution x , the

set of its solutions is the set x + u (0), obtained by translation from the kernel

u (0) of u. Observe that u (0), being a submodule, is never empty, since it con-
tains (called the zero solution, or trivial solution, of the homogeneous equation
u(x) = 0).

By virtue of Proposition 14, for a linear equation u(x) = y to have exactly
one solution, it is necessary and sufficient that it have at least one solution and

that u (0) = {0} (in other words, that the associated homogeneous equation
have no non-zero solution, or also that u be injective); in this case, for all
y e F, the equation u(x) — y has at most one solution.

Proposition 15. Let u be a linear mapping of a module E into a module F. If the
equation u{x) = y has at least one solution, y is orthogonal to the kernel of l u.

To say that u(x) = y admits a solution means that y e w(E) and the
proposition follows from no. 5, Corollary to Proposition 8.



t This is in fact an abuse of language; from the logical point of view, we are not
here defining the word "solution", but simply the sentence "x is a solution of the
equation u(x) = y " as equivalent to the relation "x e E and u(x ) = y ". Observe
that in a mathematical theory &amp;~ where the relation "A is a ring, E and F are A-
modules, u is a homomorphism of E intoF, y Q an element of F" is a theorem, every
term T of &amp;~ such that the relation "TgE and u(T) = y Q " is true in «^" is a solution
of the equation u{x) = y in the sense of Set Theory, I, § 5, no. 2; this justifies the
above abuse of language.

241



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Observe that the necessary criterion for the existence of a solution of
u(x) = y 0) given by Proposition 15, is sufficient when A is afield (§ 7, no. 6,
Proposition 12), but not in general (Exercise 10).

Remarks. (1) Let E be an A-module, (F t ) t6l a family of A-modules and for
all , e I let i/ t : E -&gt; F t be a linear mapping. Every system of linear equations

(29) «,(*) = y, (,el)

where the y l e F t are given, is equivalent to a single linear equation u(x) = y,

where « is the mapping x t-&gt; (k,(*)) of E into F = l g l F t and y — (y t ). The

system (29) is called homogeneous if y t = for all ,el.

(2) Suppose that E admits a basis{a &gt; ) Ke i J ' i if we set «(«*) = ^forallXeL,

to say that x = 2, J^a* satisfies the equation u(x) = y is equivalent to say-

A 6 L

ing that the family (of finite support) (50xeL of elements of A satisfies the
relation

(30) „?i^a = y°-

Conversely, looking for families (^)* eL of elements of A of finite support
satisfying (30), is equivalent to solving the linear equation u{x) = y , where
u is the unique linear mapping of E into F such that u(a^) = b K for all X e L
(§ 1, no. 11, Corollary 3 to Proposition 17).

(3) A linear equation u(x) = y Q is called scalar when F = A s and therefore
u is a linear form on E andy a scalar. If E admits a basis (a K ) KeLl , it follows
from Remark (2) that such an equation may also be written as

(31) x ^5x«x = yo 6 A

where the family of scalars (&lt;x x ) is arbitrary and where it is understood that
the family (^) must have finite support. In general, by the solution (in A) of
a system of scalar linear equations

(32) 2 $x«xi = rji (, 6 I)

A € Li

where a Xt e A and 7) t e A, is understood a family (£*,)* 6 l of elements of A of
finite support and satisfying (32) ; the a^ are called the coejficients of the system
of equations and the r^ the right hand sides. The solution of such a system is
equivalent to that of the equation u(x) = y, where y = (r] t ) and m:A ( s l) -&gt;■ A£
is the linear mapping



is also called a .sy.y£
d confusion. A syst

(33) 2^,^ = 7], ( t 6l)



(4) A linear system (32) is also called a system of left scalar linear equations
when it is necessary to avoid confusion. A system of equations



242



TENSOR PRODUCT OF TWO MODULES §3.1

is likewise called a system of right scalar linear equations; such a system can
immediately be transformed into a system (32) by considering the £ x , 7] t and
a. Kl as belonging to the opposite ring A to A.



§ 3. TENSOR PRODUCTS



1. TENSOR PRODUCT OF TWO MODULES

Let G l5 G 2 be two Z-modules; a mapping u of the set G = Gj x G 2 into
a Z-module is called biadditive (or Z-bilinear) if u(x x , x 2 ) is "additive with
respect to x x and with respect to x 2 "; to be precise, this means that, for x x , y x
in G l9 x 2 , y 2 in G 2 ,

"(*i + Vi, x 2 ) = «(*i, * a ) + "(yi&gt; *a)
"(*i&gt;* 2 +#2) = u(x x ,x 2 ) + u{x x ,y 2 ).

Note that this implies in particular that «(0, x 2 ) = u(x x , 0) = for all
x x e G l5 x 2 e G 2 .

Let A be a ring, E a right A-module and F a left A-module. We are going to
consider the universal mapping problem (Set Theory, IV, § 3, no. 1) where S is
the species of Z-module structure (the morphisms then being Z-linear mappings,
in other words, additive group homomorphisms) and the a-mappings are the
mappings / of E x F into a Z-module G which are Z-bilinear and further
satisfy, for all x e E, y e F and X e A

(1) /(*X,y) =/(*,ty).

We show that this problem admits a solution. For this we consider the
Z-module G = Z (BxF) of formal linear combinations of the elements of E x F
with coefficients in Z (§ 1, no. 1 1), a basis of which can be considered to consist
of the ordered pairs (x, y), where xeE and y e F. Let D be the sub-Z-module
of C generated by the elements of one of the following types :

f(*i + x 2 ,y) - (x lt y) - (x 2 ,y)

(2) &lt;j (*,y x + y 2 ) ~ (x,y x ) - (x,y 2 )

where x, x lt x 2 are in E, y, y x , y 2 are in F and X is in A.

Definition 1 . The tensor product of the right A-module E and the left A-module F,
denoted byE &lt;S&gt; F or E ® A F (or simply E &lt;g) F if no confusion is to be feared)
is the quotient Z-module C/D (the quotient of the Z-module C of formal linear

243



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

combinations of elements of E x F with coefficients in Z, by the submodule
D generated by the elements of one of the types (2)). For x e E and y e F, the
element of E ® A F which is the canonical image of the element (x, y)ofC = Z (E x F)
is denoted by x &lt;g&gt;y and called the tensor product of x andy.

The mapping (x, y) i-&gt; x &lt;S&gt;y of E x F into E ® A F is called canonical.
It is a X-bilinear mapping which satisfies conditions (1).

We show that the tensor product E A F and the above canonical mapping
form a solution of the universal mapping problem posed earlier. To be pre-
cise:

Proposition 1 . (a) Let g be a X-linear mapping of E (g) A F into a X-module G.
The mapping (x,y) &gt;-&gt;/(*,#) = g(x &lt;&amp;y) of E x F into G is X-bilinear and
satisfies conditions (1).

(b) Conversely, letf be a Z-bilinear mapping of E x F into a X-module G satis-
fying conditions (1). Then there exists one and only one X-linear mapping g of
E &lt;g) A F into G such thatf(x, y) = g{x ® y) for x e E, y e F.

If § denotes the canonical mapping of E x F into E ® A F, then/ = g ° &lt;j&gt;;
whence (a). To show (b), we note that, in the notation of Definition 1, /
extends to a Z-linear mapping/ of C into G (§ 1, no. 11, Proposition 17).
By virtue of relations (l),/is zero for all the elements of C of one of the types
(2) and hence on D. There therefore exists a Z-linear mapping g of
C/D = E &lt;g) A F into G such that/ = g o ^, where ^ : G -&gt; C/D is the canonical
homomorphism (§ 1, no. 8, Remark). The uniqueness of g is immediate since
E &lt;g) A F is generated, as a Z-module, by the elements of the form x &lt;g) y.

Proposition 1 defines a canonical isomorphism of the Z-module of Z-bilinear
mappings /of E x F into G, satisfying conditions (1), onto the Z-module
Hom 2 (E ® A F,G).

When A = Z, conditions (1) are automatically satisfied for every Z-
bilinear mapping /and the submodule D of G is already generated by the
elements of the first two types in (2).

If now we return to the general case and E' and F' denote the under-
lying Z-modules of E and F respectively, the above remark and Definition 1
show immediately that the Z-module E ® A F can be canonically identi-
fied with the quotient of the Z-module E' ® z F' by the sub-Z-module
generated by the elements of the form (*X) ® y — x ® (ty), where x
runs through E, y runs through F and X runs through A.

Corollary 1 . Let H be a X-module and h : E x F -&gt; H a X-bilinear mapping
satisfying conditions (1) and such that H is generated by A(E x F). Suppose that for
every X-module G and every X-bilinear mapping f of E x F into G satisfying (1)

244



TENSOR PRODUCT OF TWO LINEAR MAPPINGS § 3.2

there exists a Z-linear mapping £:H-&gt;G such that f = g ° h. Then, if § denotes
the canonical mapping ofExF into E (g) A F, there exists one and only one isomorph-
ism 8 qfE &lt;g) A F onto H such that h = 8 o &lt;j&gt;.

The hypothesis that h(E x F) generates H implies the uniqueness of g;
the corollary is then just the general uniqueness property of a solution of a
universal mapping problem (Set Theory, IV, § 3, no. 1).

Corollary 2. Let E° (resp. F°) denote the module E (resp. F) considered as a left
(resp. right) module over the opposite ring A ; then there exists one and only one Z-
module isomorphism a:E &lt;g) A F -+ F° (g) A o E° such that a(x ® y) = y ® x for
x e E andy e F ("commutativity" of tensor products).

By definition of the A°-module structures on E° and F°, the mapping
(x,y) \-^y ® x of E x F into F° ® A o E° is Z-bilinear and satisfies condi-
tions (1), whence the existence and uniqueness of the Z-linear mapping a.
Similarly a Z-linear mapping t:F° ® a oE°-^-E ® a F is defined such that
x(y ® x) = x 0y and clearly a and t are inverse isomorphisms.

Remark. The tensor product of non-zero modules may be zero : for example,
taking the two Z-modules E = Z/2Z and F = Z/3Z, 2* = and 3y =
for all x e E and y eF; therefore, in E Z F,

x (8) y = 3(x (8) y) - 2(x &lt;g&gt; y) = x &lt;g&gt; (3y) - (2x) &lt;g&gt; y =

for all x and y (cf. no. 6, Corollary 4 to Proposition 6).

2. TENSOR PRODUCT OF TWO LINEAR MAPPINGS

Let A be a ring, E, E' two right A-modules, F, F' two left A-modules and
t/:E -&gt; E' and v:F -&gt; F' two A-linear mappings. It is easily verified that the
mapping

(*,y) •-&gt;«(*) ® v(y)

of E x F into E' © A F' is Z-bilinear and satisfies conditions (1) of no. 1. By
Proposition 1 of no. 1 there thus exists one and only one Z-linear mapping
w: E (g) A F -&gt; E' ® A F' such that

(3) w(x&lt;g&gt;y) = u(x) ®v(y)

for x e E, y e F. This mapping is denoted by u ® v (when no confusion can
arise) and is called the tensor product of the linear mappings u and v.

It follows immediately from (3) that (u, v) h&gt; u ® v is a Z-bilinear mapping
called canonical

Hom A (E, E') x Hom A (F, F') -» Hom z (E &lt;g&gt; A F, E' &lt;g) A F').

245



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

There corresponds to it by Proposition 1 of no. 1 a Z-linear mapping called
canonical

(4) Hom A (E, E') ® z Hom A (F, F) -&gt; Hom z (E ® A F, E' ® A F)

which associates with every element u ® &amp; of the tensor product the linear mapping
u&lt;g&gt;v:E ® A F-&gt;E' ® A F. Note that the canonical mapping (4) is not
necessarily injective nor surjective. The notation u ® v can therefore lead to con-
fusion and it will be necessary for the context to indicate whether it denotes
an element of the tensor product or a linear mapping.

Further, let E" be a right A-module, F" a left A-module and u'\E' -&gt; E",
v':E' -+ F" A-linear mappings; it follows from (3) that

(5) (u' o u) ® (»' o v) = («' ® »') o (u ® o).

3. CHANGE OF RING

Proposition 2. Let A, B be two rings, p:B-*-A a ring homomorphism and E
(resp. F) a right (resp. left) A-module. Then there exists one and only one Z-linear
mapping

(6) &lt;f&gt;:p*(E) ® B p*(F)-^E ® a F

such that, for all xeE and yeF, the image under &lt;J&gt; of the element x ® y of
p»*(E) ® B p*(F) is the element x ® y ofE ® A F; this Z-linear mapping is surjec-
tive.

We consider the mapping (x,y) &gt;-&gt; x ®y of p*(E) x p # (F) into E ® A F;
it is Z-bilinear and, for all peB, by definition (*p(P)) ® y = x ® (p(P)y),
hence conditions (1) of no. 1 hold, whence the existence and uniqueness of §
(no. 1, Proposition 1). The latter assertion follows from the fact that the ele-
ments x ® y generate the Z-module E ® A F.

The mapping (6) is called canonical.

Corollary. Let 3 be a two-sided ideal of A such that 3 is contained in the anni-
hilator ofE and in the annihilator ofF, so that E (resp. F) has a canonical left (resp.
right) (A/ty-module structure ( § 1, no. 12). Then the canonical homomorphism (6)

&lt;j&gt;:E ® A F-&gt;E ® A/3 F
corresponding to the canonical homomorphism p:A -&gt; A/ 3 is the identity.

For all a e A/3, all x e E and all y e F, xoi = xon (resp. ay = a.y) for all a
such that p(a) = a. If C = Z (ExF) , the submodule of C generated by the
elements (xa, y) — (*, ay) is then equal to the submodule generated by the
elements (xa.,y) — (x, a.y).

With the hypotheses and notation of Proposition 2, let E' be a right B-
module, F' a left B-module and consider two semi-linear mappings u:E' -&gt; E,

246



OPERATORS ON A TENSOR PRODUCT; TENSOR PRODUCTS AS MULTIMODULES § 3.4

v : F' -&gt; F relative to the homomorphism p : B -&gt; A; a (resp. v) can be considered
as a B-linear mapping E'-&gt;p*(E) (resp. F' -&gt; p*(F)), whence a Z-linear
mapping w :E' &lt;g) B F'-&gt; p*(E) B p^(F) such that a&gt;(*' 0y') = «(*') (8) o(y')
for x' e E', y' e F'; composing the canonical mapping (6) with this mapping,
a Z-linear mapping w':E' B F'-^E A F is hence obtained such that
w'(x' 0y') = u(x') &lt;g&gt;v(y') for *' 6 E', y'eF'; this is the mapping which
will normally be denoted by a v if no confusion can arise. Clearly
(a, v) i-&gt; a v is a Z-bilinear mapping

Hom B (E',p # (E)) x Hom B (F', P!te (F))-&gt;Hom z (E' B F',E A F).

Moreover, if C is a third ring, cr : C -&gt; B a homomorphism, E" a right C-module,
F" a left C-module, a':E"-*-E' and r&gt;':F"-&gt;F' semi-linear mappings rela-
tive to ct, then

(U o u') (V o v') = {U V) o (u' V').

4. OPERATORS ON A TENSOR PRODUCT; TENSOR PRODUCTS AS MULTI-
MODULES

With the hypotheses and notation of no. 1 , for every endomorphism a (resp.
v) of the A-module E (resp. F), « 1 P (resp. 1 E v) is an endomorphism of
the Z-module E A F; it follows immediately from (5) (no. 2) that the map-
ping an-ag l p (resp. v ■-»■ 1 E v) is a ring homomorphism

End A (E) -&gt; End z (E A F)

(resp. End A (F) -&gt; End z (E A F)) ; moreover,

(7) (a 1 F ) o (1 E v) = (1 E v) o (u 1 F ) = u v

and therefore (§ 1, no. 14) E A F has a canonical left bimodule structure with
respect to the rings End A (E) and End A (F).

This being so, suppose given on E a ((BJ); A, (C'^-multimodule structure
and on F a (A, (B£); (C£))-multimodule structure (§ 1, no. 14); it amounts
to the same to say that ring homomorphisms B f ' -*- End A (E), CJ° -&gt; End A (E)
are given with pairwise permutable images, and ring homomorphisms
Bfc -&gt; End A (F), Cj; -+ End A (F) with pairwise permutable images. If these
homomorphisms are composed respectively with the canonical homomorph-
isms End A (E) -&gt; End 2 (E A F) and End A (F) -&gt; End z (E A F) defined
above, it is seen (taking account of (7)) that ring homomorphisms

B,' -&gt; End z (E A F), C;° -&gt; End z (E A F)
B£ -&gt; End z (E A F), QJ° -&gt; End z (E A F)

are defined with pairwise permutable images; in other words, there has been
defined on E A F a ((BJ), (B£); (Cy), (Ck))-multimodule structure; it is this
multimodule which is also called the tensor product (relative to A) of the

247



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

((Bj); A, (Cj)) -multimodule E and the (A, (B£); (C^)) -multimodule F. This multi-
module is the solution of a universal mapping problem analogous to that
considered in no. 1 ; to be precise :

Proposition 3. Let G be a ((BJ), (B£); (C^), {CI)) -multimodule.

(a) Let g be a linear mapping of the multimodule E A F into G. The mapping
f'.(x,y) t-&gt;g(x &lt;g&gt;y) of E x F into G is Z-bilinear and satisfies relations (1) of

no. 1 and the conditions

(Q) ( fiv-fcy) = V&lt;f{x&gt;y), f{xv' u y) =/(*,y)v;

; l/(*, n&amp;) = v-Ufry), /(*,K) =/(*,yK

/or all x eE,y e F, [Xj e B-, vj e CJ, jx£ e B^, v£ e C£, z", j, A, A; arbitrary.

(b) Conversely, let f be a 7L-bilinear mapping q/ExF into G satisfying conditions
(1) (no. 1) and (8). 7/fora there exists one and only one linear mapping g of the multi-
module E A F into the multimodule G such that f(x, y) = g(x &lt;g&gt;y) for x e E,
yeF.

Assertion (a) follows immediately from the definition of the multimodule
structure on E A F, since for example (x 0y)vy = (xv'j) 0y. To prove (b),
we note first that Proposition 1 of no. 1 gives the existence and uniqueness of a
Z-linear mapping g such that g(x y) = f(x,y) for x e E, y e F; all that is
needed is to verify that g is linear for the multimodule structures. As the elements
x y generate the Z-module E (g) A F, it suffices to verify the relations
g([jf(x ®y)) = y.'tg(x 0y) and their analogues; but this follows immediately
from the formula g(x 0y) — f(x,y) and relations (8).

Scholium. An element of E A F may in general be written in several ways

in the form 2* (x { y^, where ^eE and y t e F; but to define a linear mapping

g of the multimodule E A F into a multimodule G, there is no need to

verify that, if Z, (x t ®y,)=Z (*J yj), then Z g{x t y t ) = Z, g(*j y)) ;
t j * 3

it suffices to be given g(x y) for x e E and yeF and to verify that
(x,y) *-&gt; g(x &lt;S&gt;y) is Z-bilinear and satisfies conditions (1) (no. 1) and (8).

Let E' be a ((B{), A, (C^)) -multimodule, F' an (A, (BjJ); (CQ) -multimodule
and w:E -&gt; E', v:F -&gt; F' linear mappings of multimodules; it follows immedi-
ately from the definitions (no. 2) that u v is a linear mapping of the
multimodule E A F into the multimodule E' A F'.

With E always denoting a right A-module, let jA d denote the ring A con-
sidered as an (A, A)-bimodule (§ 1, no. 14, Example 1); by the above, the
tensor product E A ( s A d ) has a canonical right A-module structure such that
(x X)jjl = x (X[a) for x g E, X e A, \i e A. The mapping (x, X) &gt;-*■ xX of
E x (sA d ) into E is Z-bilinear and satisfies conditions (1) (no. 1) and (8)

248



TENSOR PRODUCT OF TWO MODULES OVER A COMMUTATIVE RING § 3.5

(where, in the latter, the B[, CJ and B£ are absent and the family (C£) reduces
to A); hence (Proposition 3), there exists an A-linear mapping g (called canoni-
cal) of E &lt;g) A (sAd) int o E such that g(x ® X) = xX for * e E, X e A.

Proposition 4. If E is a right A-module, the mapping h:x*-+x&lt;gil of E into
E A (,A d ) is a right A-module isomorphism, whose inverse isomorphism g is such
that g(x &lt;g) X) = x\for x e E, X £ A.

If g is the canonical mapping, g o h is the identity mapping 1 E and hog
coincides with the identity mapping of E ® A (.A,,) onto itself for elements of
the form x &lt;g)y, which generate the latter Z-module; hence the conclusion.

We shall normally write E ® A A instead of E &lt;g&gt; A (Ad) and shall often
identify E ® A A with E by means of the above canonical isomorphisms.
Observe that, if E also has a (left or right) B-module structure which is com-
patible with its right A-module structure, g and h are also isomorphisms for the
B-module structures on E and E &lt;g&gt; A A (and hence multimodule isomorphisms) .

Now let F be a left A-module; (An) &lt;g&gt; A F (also denoted by A ® A F) then
has a canonical left A-module structure and as in Proposition 4 a canonical
isomorphism is defined of A &lt;g&gt; A F onto F mapping X &lt;g&gt; x to X*, and its
inverse isomorphism is x h-»- 1 x.

In particular there exists a canonical isomorphism of the (A, A)-bimodule
(Ad) ® a (Ad) onto Ad which maps X &lt;g&gt; fx to X[x.

5. TENSOR PRODUCT OF TWO MODULES OVER A COMMUTATIVE RING

Let G be a commutative ring; for every C-module E, the module structure on E
is compatible with itself (§ 1, no. 14). If E and F are two G-modules, the considera-
tions of no. 4 then allow us to define two C-module structures on the tensor
product E ® F, respectively such that y(x &lt;g&gt;y) = (yx) ®# and such that
y(*®y) = x &lt;8&gt;(yy)'&gt; Dut as &gt; D Y Definition 1 of no. 1, in this case
(yx) ®y = x ® (yy)j these two structures are the same. Henceforth when we
speak of" E ® c F as a C-module, we shall mean with the structure thus defined,
unless otherwise stated. The canonical isomorphism.

a:F ® C E-»E &lt;g) c F

(no. 1, Corollary 2 to Proposition 1) is then a C-module isomorphism.

It follows from this definition that, if (a K ) KeL (resp. (*u) u6M ) is a generating
system of the C-module E (resp. F), (a K ® bj is a generating system of the
C-module E ® c F; in particular, if E and F are finitely generated C-modules,
so is E ® c F.

For every C-module G, the Z-bilinear mappings / of E x F into G for
which

(9) f(v*, y) = f( x &gt; yy) = y/(*» y) for * e E &gt; y e F &gt; r e G

249



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

are then called C-bilinear and form a C-module denoted by JSf 2 (E, F;G);
Proposition 3 (no. 4) defines a canonical C-module isomorphism (cf. § 1, no. 14,
Remark 1).

(10) ^ 2 (E, F; G) -&gt; Hom c (E &lt;g) c F, G).

Let E', F' be two C-modules and u : E -&gt; E', v : F -&gt;• F' two C-linear map-
pings; then (no. 4) u ® v is a C-linear mapping of E (g) c F into E' (g) c F'.
Further, it is immediate that (u, v) h-&gt; w (g) z&gt; is a C-bilinear mapping of
Hom c (E, E') x Hom c (F, F') into Hom c (E &lt;g) c F, E' (g) c F') ; hence there
canonically corresponds to it a C-linear mapping, called canonical:

(11) Hom c (E, E') ® c Hom c (F, F') -^ Hom c (E ® c F, E' ® c F')
which associates with every element u&lt;g&gt;vofthe tensor product

Hom c (E, E') ® c Hom c (F, F')

the linear mapping u ® v. Note that the canonical mapping (11) is not necessarily
injective nor surjective (§ 4, Exercise 2) .

Remarks. (1) Let A, B be two commutative rings, p:B -&gt; A a ring homomorph-
ism and E and F two A-modules; then the canonical mapping (6) of no. 3 is a
B-linear mapping

(12) p*(E) ®p«(F)-* P „(E0 A F).

(2) What has been said in this no. can be generalized to the following case :
let E be a right A-module, F a left A-module, C a commutative ring and
p:C-&gt;A a homomorphism of G into A such that p(C) is contained in the
centre of A (cf. Ill, § 1, no. 3). We may then consider the C-modules p*(E)
and p#(F) and the hypothesis on p implies that these C-module structures are
compatible respectively with the A-module structures on E and F (§ 1, no. 14).
The tensor product E ® A F is thus (by virtue of no. 4) given two C-module
structures such that y(x &lt;g)y) = (*p(y)) &lt;8&gt;y and

f{x®y) = x® (p(y)y)

respectively for y e C, x e E, y e F and Definition 1 (no. 1) shows also that
these two structures are identical. If E' (resp. F') is a right (resp. left)
A-module and m:E-&gt;E', »:F-&gt;F' are two A-linear mappings, then
«®»:E ® A F-&gt;E' ® A F' is C-linear for the C-module structures just
defined; the mapping («, v) &gt;-&gt;■ u &lt;g&gt; v :

Hom A (E, E') x Hom A (F, F) -* Hom c (E ® A F, E' &lt;g&gt; A F')

is C-bilinear (for the C-module structures on Hom A (E, E') and Hom A (F, F')

250



PROPERTIES OF E (g) A F RELATIVE TO EXACT SEQUENCES § 3.6

defined in § 1, no. 14, Remark 1), whence we also derive a C-linear mapping,
called canonical

(13) Hom A (E, E') ® c Hom A (F, F) -» Hom c (E &lt;g&gt; A F, E' A F).

(3) Let A be an integral domain and K its field of fractions. If E and F are
two vector K-spaces, the canonical mapping

(E [A] ) ® A (F [A] )-&gt;E &lt;g) K F

(no. 3 and § 1, no. 13) is bijective. It suffices (no. 4) to prove that if/" is an A-
bilinear mapping of E x F into a vector K-space G,/is also K.-bilinear. Now,
for all a ^ in A.

&lt;x.f{a.~ 1 x,y) =f(x,y) = a/(*, a _1 y)
whence

/(a ~ x x, y) = /(*, a " V) = a " */(*, y)

since G is a vector K-space.

6. PROPERTIES OF E® A F RELATIVE TO EXACT SEQUENCES

Proposition 5. Let E, E', E" be right A-modules, F a left A-module and

(14) E' -^-&gt; E -U E" — &gt;

aw ixof£ sequence of linear mappings. Writing u = u 1 F , v = v ® 1 F , the sequence

(15) E' &lt;g&gt; A F ~^-&gt; E (g) A F -% E" A F — &gt;
ofL-homomorphisms is exact.

By virtue of no. 2, formula (5), v o u = (z&gt; o #) (g) l p = 0; the image
H = w(E' (g) F) is contained in the kernel L = Ker(o) ; by passing to the
quotient, we therefore derive from v a Z-linear mapping f of the cokernel
M = (E ® F)/H of u into E" ® F; it must be proved that f is bijective and it
will hence suffice to define a Z-linear mapping g:E" (g)F-^M such that
g ofandfo g are the identity mappings.

Let /eE", yeF; by hypothesis there exists xeE such that v(x) = x".
We show that, if x x , x 2 are two elements of E such that v{x^) = v(x 2 ) = x"
and (j&gt;:E ® F-&gt; M is the canonical mapping, then §(x x ®y) = §(x 2 ®y).
It suffices to prove that if v(x) = then §(x ®y) = 0, which follows from the
fact that x = u(x') with x' e E', whence x &lt;giy = u(x') (g)y = u(x' &lt;giy) gH.
If (x",y) is mapped to the unique value of §(x ® y) for all # e E such that
v(x) = x", a mapping is defined of E" x F into M; this mapping is Z-bilinear
and satisfies conditions (1) (no. 1), since v(x"k) = #"X and (#X) &lt;g&gt; y = x (ky)
for x eE; hence there is a Z-linear mapping g of E" ® F into M such that
g(x" &lt;8&gt;y) = §(x 0y) for ye F, #eE and x" = v(x). This definition further
proves that fog coincides with the identity mapping for the elements of

251



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

E" ® F of the form x" @y and hence y*o g is the identity mapping of E" F;
on the other hand, for x e E and y e F,f($(x ® y)) — v(x) (g&gt; y by definition,
hence g(f($(x &lt;8&gt;y))) = §(x &lt;g&gt;y) and, as the elements of the form &lt;j&gt;(# ®#)
generate M, g o^is the identity mapping of M.

Corollary. Let F, F', F" be left A-modules, E a right A-module and

(16) F'-UF-^F' — &gt;

&lt;zra extfc/ sequence of linear mappings. Writing s = \ E &lt;g&gt; s, t = 1 E (g) /, the sequence
of X-homomorphisms

(17) E ® A F' -U E ® A F -U E ® A F" — &gt;

is exact.

When E (resp. F) is considered as a left (resp. right) A°-module, F &lt;g) A o E
is identified with E (g) A F and there are analogous identifications for F' (g) A o E
and F" &lt;g) A ° E (no. 1, Corollary 2 to Proposition 1) ; the corollary then follows
immediately from Proposition 5.

Remark. Note that in general, if E' is a submodule of a right A-module E
andj:E' -*» E the canonical injection, the canonical mapping

j® 1 F :E' ®F-^E&lt;g&gt;F

is not necessarily injective. In other words, for an exact sequence

(18) — &gt; E' -^-» E -^-&gt; E* — &gt;
it cannot in general be concluded that the sequence

(19) — &gt; E'®F -U EOF -U E"®F — *
is exact.

Take for example A = Z, E = Z, E' = 2Z, F = Z/2Z. As E' is isomorphic
to E, E' (g) F is isomorphic to E® F which is itself isomorphic to F
(no. 4, Proposition 4). But for all x' = 2x e E' (where x e E) and all
y e F, j(x') ®y = (2x) ® y = x &lt;g) (2#) = 0, since 2y = 0, and the
canonical image of E' ® F in E &lt;g) F reduces to 0.

In other words, care must be taken to distinguish, for a submodule E'
of E and an element x e E', between the element x ® y "calculated in
E' &lt;g&gt; F" and the element x ® y "calculated in E ® F" (in other words,
the element j (x) ® y).

We shall study later, under the name of flat modules, the modules F
such that the sequence (19) is exact for every exact sequence (18) (Com-
mutative Algebra, I, § 2).

Proposition 6. Given two exact sequences (14) and (16), the homomorphism
v (g)£:E ® A F -&gt; E" &lt;g&gt; A F"w surjective and its kernel is equal to

Im(w &lt;g&gt; 1 F ) + Im(l E &lt;g) s)
252



PROPERTIES OF E ® A F RELATIVE TO EXACT SEQUENCES § 3.6

Now v (g) t = (o(g)l p -)o(l E (g)f) (no. 2, formula (5)) and v ® £ is therefore
surjective, being the composition of two surjective homomorphisms by virtue
of Proposition 5 and its Corollary. On the other hand, for z e E (g) F to be in
the kernel of v (g) t, it is necessary and sufficient that (1 E ® t) (z) belong to the
kernel of v &lt;g) 1 F «, that is, by virtue of (15) to the image of

u® lf^E' ® F" -&gt; E (g&gt; F".

But as the homomorphism t : F -&gt; F" is surjective, so is

1 E , &lt;g&gt; *:E'®F-&gt;E / ®F*

by the Corollary to Proposition 5, hence the condition on z reduces to the
existence of an a e E' &lt;g) F such that

(1 B &lt;8&gt;*)(2) = («®0(«)«
Let b = z - (u ® l F )(a); then (1 E ® t){b) = 0, and by virtue of (17), b
belongs to the image of 1 E ® s, which proves the proposition.

In other words:

Corollary 1 . Let E' be a submodule of a right A-module E, F' a submodule of a
left A-module F and Im(E' ® A F) and Im(E &lt;g) A F') the sub-Z-modules ofE &lt;g) A F,
the respective images of the canonical mappings E' ® A F -&gt; E ® A F,

E &lt;g&gt; A F'-&gt;E ® A F.

Then there is a canonical Z,-module isomorphism

(20) tc :(E/E') ® A (F/F) -&gt; (E &lt;g) A F)/(Im(E' &lt;g&gt; A F) + Im(E ® A F'))

such that, for £ e E/E', yj £ F, 7t(£ ® 73) w /fo c/att 0/" a# elements x ® y g E (g) A F
jmcA ^a£ x g ^ anrfy G TQ.

Note that when E is a ((B{); A, (C;))-multimodule, F a (A, (BJ); (C£))-
multimodule and E' and F' submultimodules of E and F respectively, the iso-
morphism (20) is an isomorphism for the ((BJ), (B£); (CJ), (CjJ)) -multi-
module structures of the two sides (no. 3).

Corollary 2. Let a be a right ideal of A, F a left A-module and oF the sub-X-
module of F generated by the elements of the form "kx, where X G and x e F. Then
there is a canonical "L-module isomorphism

(21) ic:(A/tt) &lt;g) A F-&gt;F/aF

such that, for all a g A/a anrf a// x e F, tc(X ® x) is the class mod. aF 0/" X#, wA^re
XgX.

In particular, for A = Z, it is seen that for every integer n and every Z-
module F, (Z/wZ) ® z F is canonically identified with the quotient Z-module

F/11F.

253



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Corollary 3. Let A be a commutative ring, a an ideal of A and E and F two
A-modules suck that a is contained in the annihilator of F. Then the (A/ a) -modules
E A F and (E/aE) ® A/0 F are canonically isomorphic.

F and E ® A F are annihilated by a and hence have canonical (A/a) -module
structures (§ 1, no. 12) and if we write E' = aE, then Im(E' (g) A F) = 0; then
there is a canonical isomorphism (20) of E (g) A F onto (E/aE) (g) A F and the
latter is itself identical with (E/aE) ® A/a F (no. 3, Corollary to Proposition 2).

Corollary 4. Let a, b be two ideals in a commutative ring C; the C-module
(C/a) (g) c (C/b) is then canonically isomorphic to C(a + b).

7. TENSOR PRODUCTS OF PRODUCTS AND DIRECT SUMS

Let (E^gL be a family of right A-modules, (F w ) weM a family of left A-modules
and consider the product modules C = 1 1 E K , D = 1 i F u . The mapping
((*0&gt; (#u)) •-*" (*\ &lt;8&gt;#u) of C x D into the product Z-module



.EL ,(E X ® A FJ



(\, U)eLxM



is Z-bilinear and obviously satisfies conditions (1) (no. 1). Thus there exists
(no. 1, Proposition 1) a Z-linear mapping, called canonical

&lt; 22 &gt; AU^) ®a (Of.) ^ tt n, M ( E, ® iF j

such that/((*0 ® (y u )) = (** ® yj.

When C = R L , D = S M , R (resp. S) being a right (resp. left) A-module,
the canonical mapping (22) associates with every tensor product u &lt;g&gt; v,
where u is a mapping of L into R and v a mapping of M into S, the mapping
(X, [l) i-&gt; «(a) &lt;g&gt; y((jt) of L x M into R &lt;g) A S; even in this case the
canonical mapping (22) is in general neither injective nor surjective (Exercise 3;
cf. Corollary 3 to Proposition 7).

When the E„ are ((BJ); A, (C;))-multimodules and the F w (A, (BJ); (C*))-
multimodules, the homomorphism (22) is also a homomorphism for the
((B{), (BJJ); (Cj), (Cfc))-multimodule structures of the two sides.

Consider now the submodule E = © E K (resp. © F u ) of C (resp. D) ;

the canonical injections E -&gt; C, F -»■ D define canonically a Z-linear mapping
E &lt;g) A F-&gt;C ® A D which, composed with the mapping (22), gives a Z-

linear mapping g of E ® A F into 1 1 (E K ® A F w ) such that



g((*0 ® (y tt )) = (*x®y u );



254



TENSOR PRODUCTS OF PRODUCTS AND DIRECT SUMS § 3.7

moreover, as the families (# x ) and (yj have finite support, so does (x K (g) y w )
and hence finally g is a canonical homomorphism

(23) ,:( © E,) ® A ( © m F.) - (K © LxM (E, ® A FJ,

which is a multimodule homomorphism under the same conditions as (22).
Proposition 7. The canonical mapping (23) is bijective.

To prove this it suffices to define a Z-linear mapping h of the direct sum
G = \B (E K &lt;g) A F u ) into E (g) A F such that g°h and A o £ are the identity

(X, uleLxM

mappings. But, to define a Z-linear mapping of G into E (g) A F, it suffices
(§ 1, no. 6, Proposition 6) to define a Z-linear mapping

VEx &lt;8&gt; A F W -^E ® A F

for every ordered pair (X, fx), and we take h^ = i K (g)^, where «\:E X -&gt;E
andj^Fy -&gt; F are the canonical injections. Then clearly A o g coincides with

the identity mapping for the elements of the form \2* xA (g) (.2, yA which

generate the Z-module E (g) A F; similarly g o h coincides with the identity

mapping for the elements of the form 2-, {x % &lt;g) y u ) which generate the Z-

module G, since for each ordered pair (X, jx) the products

*x&lt;g&gt;y w KeE A ,y u GFJ

generate the Z-module E x &lt;g&gt; A F u . Whence the proposition.

Let u K :E K -&gt;■ E^,, &amp; U :F U -&gt; F£ be A-homomorphisms; clearly the diagram

(© Ex) ® A (© F B ) &gt; © (E x &lt;g&gt; A (F w )

(©"x)®(©»n) ©(kx®Pu)

Y Y

(© Ei)- ® A (© F;) &gt; © (E x (g) A Fi)

is commutative.

Corollary 1. If the left A-module F admits a basis (b VL ) iieM) every element of

E &lt;g&gt; A F ca« fo written uniquely in the form 2-, (x^ (g) £ u ), tyfor* *„gE and the

family (# w ) has finite support. The Z-module E (g) A F is isomorphic to E (M) considered
as a Z-module.

The basis (6 U ) defines an isomorphism of F onto \B A£ u , whence there is
an isomorphism E &lt;g) A F-&gt; © (E ® A A£ w ) by virtue of Proposition 7; as



USM

_ (E &lt;R&gt;* A*..) bv vi

ueM

255



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

£ i-&gt; ££ u is an isomorphism of A s onto Ab^, x *-*■ x ® b^ is an isomorphism of
E onto E (g&gt; A (A^n) by virtue of Proposition 4 of no. 4, whence the corollary.

If E is a ((Bj); A, (Cy))-multimodulej the canonical isomorphism
E &lt;g&gt; A F -* E (M) is a ((BJ) ; (GJ))-multimodule isomorphism.

In particular, if also E admits a basis (a x ) Keh , every z e E ® A F may be

written in one and only one way in the form 2, (aji^) (g&gt; b u , where the
^ tt belong to A (and form a family of finite support); the mapping
z '-»• (£xu)(\, u)eL x m is an isomorphism of E ® A F onto A (L * M) for the Z-module
structures (and even the module structures over the centre of A). More par-
ticularly:

Corollary 2. IfYi and F are two free modules over a commutative ring C and (a K )
(resp. (£ u )) is a basis of the C-module E (resp. F), then (a K (g) £ w ) «■ a basis of
the C-module E &lt;g) c F.

By an abuse of language, the basis (a K ® i u ) is sometimes called the tensor
product of the bases (a K ) and (b^).

Remark (1). Let E be a free right A-module, F a free left A-module, (c a ) X6 l
a basis of E and (6 W ) W6M a basis of F. Every element z e E ® A F may be written

uniquely as 2, a K ® y^, where y x e F, and also uniquely as 2, x^ ® £ w , where

#n e E. If we write y K = 2, r^J)^ x^ = 2, a K £ KlX) where the 5 X|l and v) Xu belong
to A, then ^ u = y] Ktx for all (X, \i), for

2, (a* (8) (2* iJxAJ) = 2; (K*)xu) ® *u) = 2 (\2&lt; «x*1mi) ® *iij-

Corollary 3. Lrf (E x ) XeL fo a family of right A-modules and F a/rw (resp.
finitely generated free) left A-module. Then the canonical mapping (22)



E,)® A F-&gt;ri(E,(8) A F)



\XeL / XeL

is injective (resp. bijective).

If (ij is a basis of F, every element of II 1 Ej &lt;g) A F can be written

uniquely as z = Z, ((a&amp; w) ) ® £&gt;u) (Corollary 1) ; to say that its canonical image

is zero means that, for all X e L, 2, (x™ ® b„) = 0, hence x 1 ^ = for all
A e L and all y. (Corollary 1) and therefore z = 0.

Showing that the canonical mapping is bijective when F admits a finite
basis is immediately reduced, by virtue of Proposition 7, to the case where

256



TENSOR PRODUCTS OF PRODUCTS AND DIRECT SUMS § 3.7

F = A s ; but then the two sides are canonically identified with I 1 E K (no. 4,

Proposition 4) and after these identifications the canonical mapping (22) be-
comes the identity.

Corollary 4. Let A be a ring with no divisor of zero, E a free right A-module
and F a free left A-module. Then the relation x ® y — in E &lt;g) A F implies x =
ory = 0.

Let (a x ) be a basis of E, (£ w ) a basis of F and let x = 2* a^, y = 2ii "f\J) # 'y

then x ® y = Z, ((flxSxVJu) ® £ w and the relation # (g) y = implies £ x y]j, =

for every ordered pairs of indices (X, fx) (Corollary 1). Hence, if x # 0, that
is £ x # for at least one X, it follows that &gt;)n = for all jx, whence y = 0.

Corollary 5. Let E be a right A-module, F a left A-module, M a submodule of E
and N submodule of F. If M is a direct factor of E anrf N a direct factor of F, the
canonical homomorphism M ® A N -&gt; E &lt;g) A F t? injective and the image ofM ® A N
under this homomorphism is a direct factor of the Z-module E A F.

This follows immediately from Proposition 7.

Note that if E is a ((BJ); A, (C;))-multimodule and F an (A, (B£); (QJ))-
multimodule and M and N direct factors in these multimodules, M &lt;g) N
is a direct factor of the ((B{), (BJ) ; (CJ), (C£))-multimodule E &lt;g&gt; F.

Corollary 6. Let P be a projective left A-module and E, F two right A-modules.
For every injective homomorphism k:E -&gt;■ F, /fo homomorphism

«0 1 P :E &lt;g) A P-&gt;F &lt;g&gt; A P
is injective.

There exists a left A-module Q such that L = P © Q is free (§ 2, no. 2,
Proposition 4) and u (g) 1 L is identified (Proposition 7) with

(« ® lp) © (a ® 1q) ;

it therefore suffices to prove the corollary when P is free (§ 1, no. 6, Corollary 1
to Proposition 7). The same argument reduces the problem to the case where
P = A s , which follows immediately from no. 4, Proposition 4.

Corollary 7. Let C be a commutative ring. IfF and F are two projective C-modules t
E ® F is a projective C-moduk.

This follows immediately from Corollary 5 and the fact that the tensor
product of two free C-modules is a free C-module (Corollary 2).

Remark 2. Under the hypotheses of Proposition 7, let E£ be a submodule of
E X ,F; a submodule ofF u and let E' = © E' x , F' = F£.LetIm(E' &lt;g) A F')

257



H LINEAR ALGEBRA

(resp. Im(E^ ® A F£)) denote the image of E' ® A F' (resp. E' x ® A F^) in
E ® A F (resp. E^ ® A FJ under the canonical mapping; then the isomorph-
ism (23) identifies the sub-Z-modules

Im(E'® A F') and lm{E &gt; r) .

a,u)eIxM

this follows immediately from the commutativity of the diagram

(fBi)® A (©r.)-*(fE,)® A (eF.)

J, y

© (Ei ® a F;) ► ® (E x ® A F,)

where the vertical arrows are the canonical isomorphisms.

8. ASSOCIATIVITY OF THE TENSOR PRODUCT

Proposition 8. Let A, B be two rings, E a right A-module, F an (A, B)-bimodule
and G a left B-module. Then E ® A F is a right B-module, F® B Ga left A-module
and there exists one and only one Z-linear mapping

(j&gt;:(E &lt;g) A F) ® B G-&gt;E &lt;g&gt; A (F ® B G)

such that &lt;j&gt;((* ® y) (g) z) = x ® (y ® 2) /or xgE, y e F, 2 e G; nwwwwr
fAu Z-linear mapping is bijective ("associativity" of the tensor product).

The right B-module structure on E ® A F and left A-module structure on
F ® B G have been defined in no. 4. The uniqueness of &lt;}&gt; is obvious since the
elements (* &lt;g&gt; y) ® z generate the Z-module (E ® A F) (g) B G. To show the
existence of (f&gt;, we note that, for all z e G, h z \ y ■-»■ y ® z is an A-linear mapping
of the left A-module F into the left A-module F ® B G. We write g z = 1 E ® h z ,
which is therefore a Z-linear mapping of E ® A F into E ® A (F ® B G) and con-
sider the mapping (*, z) ^ g a (0 from (E &lt;g&gt; A F x G into E ® A (F ® B G) ; as
K+ z &gt; = K + h z . for z 6 G, z' e G, it is immediate that the above mapping is
Z-bilinear. Further, we show that for all (x e B, g^t) = g a (*{i.) ; it is obviously
sufficient to do this for t = x ® y where * e E and y e F; now
and &amp;«(* ®y) = x ® (y ® {az)

&amp;((* ® y)v) = &amp;(* ® yp) = * ® (yt* ® *)•

Proposition 1 (no. 1) then proves the existence of a Z-linear mapping

&lt;j&gt;:(E ® A F) ® B G-&gt;E &lt;g&gt; A (F ® B G)

such that &lt;j&gt;(* ® z) = g z (t), hence &lt;j&gt;((* ® y) ® z) = * ® (y ® z). Simi-
larly a Z-linear mapping

&lt;j,:E ® A (F ® B G)-&gt;(E ® A F) ® B G

258



TENSOR PRODUCT OF FAMILIES OF MULTIMODULES § 3.9

is defined such that ty(x (y z)) = (x ® y) z and clearly ^ ° &lt;j&gt; and
&lt;J) o &lt;{, are the identity mappings of (E ® A F) B G and E A (F B G)
respectively, since they reduce to the identity mappings on generating sys-
tems of these Z-modules.

It is immediate that, if E is a ((GJ); A, (D;))-multimodule, F an
(A, (GJ) ; B, (D£))-multimodule and G a (B, (G") ; (D;))-multimodule, the
canonical isomorphism defined in Proposition 8 is a ((GJ), (CJ), (Cf) ; (DJ),
(DJ), (T&gt;l))-muUimodule isomorphism. In particular, if G is a commutative ring
and E, F, G three C-modules, there is a canonical C-module isomorphism

(E ® F) c G-&gt;E C (F ® G).

We shall see below that, under certain conditions, the definition of tensor
product can be generalized to a family of multimodules, which will in par-
ticular give us under the hypotheses of Proposition 8 a Z-module
E ® A F B G, which is canonically isomorphic to each of the Z-modules
(E ® A F) 0b G and E ® A (F B G) and with which the latter will be
identified.

9. TENSOR PRODUCT OF FAMILIES OF MULTIMODULES

Let (G x ) XeL be a family of Z-modules; a mapping u of the set G = 1^1 G x
into a Z-module is said to be multiadditive (or Z-multilinear) if (* x ) h&gt; »((* x )) is
additive with respect to each of the variables # x ; to be precise, this means that,

for all p e L and every element (a x ) e O G x , canonically identifying G with
G^xFIGx,

(24) w(* w + y» K)) = "(*•» K)) + &lt;y» ( fl 0) for *»&gt; y» in G *-

This impUes in particular that «((*0) = ° if one of the **■ is f ero *

We consider also the universal mapping problem where S is the species of
Z-module structure and the oc-mappings are the multiadditive mappings of
G into a Z-module. A solution is still obtained by considering the Z-module
C = Z (G) of formal linear combinations of elements of G with coefficients in
Z and the sub-Z-module D of G generated by the elements of the form

(*u + y» K)x*u) - (*n» ( z 0**n) - (y»» (*0**u)

where [i e L, x u e G w , y u e G u and the z„ e G x (A ^ |x) are arbitrary. The
quotient Z-module C/D is called the tensor product (over Z) of the family (G x ) X6lj
of Z-modules and is denoted by ® G x ; for every element (* x ) XeL of G which
is an element of the canonical basis of C, ® x x denotes the canonical image

K S Li

259



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

of this element in C/D. It follows from the above definitions that the mapping
&lt;j&gt; : (x K ) y-&gt; ® x K of G into ® G K is Z-multilinear and that, for every Z-multi-
linear mapping / of G into a Z-module H, there exists one and only one
Z-linear mapping g: ® G„-&gt;H such that f=go$; the ordered pair

( ® G x , &lt;J&gt;) thus resolves the universal mapping problem in question.

Let (Gx) K 8 L be another family of Z-modules and, for all X £ L, let v K : G*, -*- G£,
be a Z-linear mapping (in other words a homomorphism of commutative
groups). Then the mapping

(*0 ^ ® *\(*x)

A61j

of G into ® GJ is Z-multilinear and hence defines canonically a Z-linear map-
ping of ® G» into ® G x denoted by ® v K and such that

XeL XeL XeL

In particular, we consider, for some (xeL, an endomorphism of G^;

we denote by the endomorphism of ® G^ equal to ® z\ where &amp; u =

and v K = l Gjl for X =£ (a.
Then we suppose given a set £2, a mapping

c:g&gt; i-&gt; (p(o&gt;), o {&lt;*&gt;))

of Q into L x L and, for all o&gt; e Q, an endomorphism /&gt; u of G p((0) and an
endomorphism ? M of G a(w) ; there correspond to them two endomorphisms
S and &lt;3L of P = ® G». Let R be the sub-Z-module of P generated by the

union of the images of the endomorphisms p a — q a when to runs through Q. The
quotient Z-module P/R is called the tensor product of the family (G K ) kelj relative

to c,t&gt;, a and is denoted by ® G x ; composing the canonical homomorphism

,r ' * (c,p,«)

P^P/R with the mapping cj&gt;:G-&gt; 03 G*. defined above, we obtain a Z-
multilinear mapping &lt;j&gt; (c&gt; p&gt; „: G ~ &gt; (c ® ) G x and write -&lt;i&gt;&lt;c.p.«&gt;((*0) = ( ® Q) **

or simply ® *». The ordered pair consisting of ® x K and &lt;j&gt; (c p 9) resolves

r ' (c) (c. p. g)

the following universal mapping problem: letp a (resp. q a ) denote the mapping

(*p&lt;e&gt;» (*0*.#p(co)) *-*" (Ao(*p(co))j (#\)a.,£p&lt;&lt;o))
(resp. (* o(01) , (*0* *&lt;««)) ^ (?co(*ata))j (*0 **&lt;*»&gt;))

of G into itself. Then 2 is taken to be the species of Z-module structure and the
260



TENSOR PRODUCT OF FAMILIES OF MULTIMODULES § 3.9

a-mappings the Z-multilinear mappings u of G into a Z-module which fur-
ther satisfy the conditions

(26) uop a = U og a

for all co e Q. The proof is obvious from the above definitions.

This construction recovers in particular that of E ® A F described in
no. 1 : in this case we take L = {1, 2}, Gt = E, G 2 = F, Q = A; further,
for all co e A, we must have p(co) = 1, a(co) = 2, m is the endomorphism
x i-&gt;- xco of the Z-module E and q a the endomorphism y i-&gt; ay of the Z-
module F.

Let (G£)a, eL be a second family of Z-modules; keeping the mapping c the
same, suppose given for all weQ, an endomorphism p' a of G p(t0) and an
endomorphism q' a of G£ (w) . For all X e L, then let v K :G K -&gt; G^ be a Z-linear
mapping such that, for all wefl,

(27) » p(ta) °p a =p' a ° z&gt;p(o» and v a(a) ° q a = q' a ° VaW)

(in other words, for all X e L, » x is a morphism for the laws of action on G x
(resp. G' x ) defined on the /&gt; 5 and q n (resp. /&gt;£ and qfi with £ and &gt;] such that
p(£) = x and &lt;t(t]) = X). Then the mapping

M: (*x)^,,.® »jl(*x)
of G into ® G[ is Z-multilinear and satisfies conditions (26) and hence

(CP'.fl')

defines a Z-linear mapping of &amp; G»into VS&gt; G£, which we shall denote
simply by Q&gt;) o x if no confusion can arise.

We shall now give an "associativity" property for the general tensor products
thus defined. Let (L t ) 1&lt;i&lt;B be a. finite partition of L; for every index i, let Q t
denote the subset of Q. consisting of the elements such that p(co) eL, and

a (co) 6 L ( ; clearly the Q t are pairwise disjoint; we set Of = Q. — (U QA. For
each index i, c U) will denote the mapping co ►-&gt; (p(co), «r(co)) of Q { into L f x L,;
for co e Q u we write /^ and q { £ instead of p w and q a . Then for each i there is
a "partial" tensor product

F, = ® G x .

We shall further make the following "permutability" hypothesis:

(P) If co g Q', /&gt; u (resp. &lt;7 M ) permutes with each of the endomorphisms p x and q^
of G p(0)) (resp. G C(Q) ) such that 1$ Q', yj $ O' and p(co) = p(&lt;;) = o(ij) (resp.
cr(co) = p(5) = a(7))).

261



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

For each co e Q,', let i be the index such that p(co) e L ( ; then consider the
family (v K ) keU where z&gt; p((0) = p a and v K = l Gx for X ^ p ( w ); hypothesis (P)
implies that the family \v K ) satisfies conditions (27) (where p' and p must be
replaced by p m , q' and q by q (i) , &lt;o by an element £ running through Q t ) ;
thus an endomorphism ® &amp;„ = r M is derived of the Z-module F f . Similarly, an

endomorphism s a is defined of the Z-module F, starting with q a , j being the
index such that &lt;x(w) e L,; finally let rf(w) = (*', j). Then we can define the
tensor product ® F&lt; and the corresponding canonical mapping

^ (d.r.s)

n

&lt;b wr ^riF,-* ® f { .

On the other hand, for each i, the canonical mapping
&lt;h = &lt;l&gt;(c (0 .p &lt;0 ,« &lt;0 ) : J- e l G x -&gt;F t ;
using the associativity of the product of sets, a Z-multilinear mapping
i&gt; = &lt;i&gt;&lt;d,r, s) ° (&lt;M of G into ® F i is derived. We show that the ordered pair
I §9 F«, tb 1 w fl solution of the same universal problem as I 09 G x , ^( C ,p,g))j

\(&lt;J,r,s) " V . Mc.P.Q) i

whence will follow the existence of a unique Z-module isomorphism

6: ® G x -&gt; &lt;8&gt; F,

(c,p,o) (d,r,s)

such that $ = 8 o &lt;j) (c&gt;Pt(J) (&amp;t 77ieon/, IV, § 3, no. 1).

By induction on n] the proof is reduced to the case n = 2; for simplicity

we write F, &lt;g&gt; F 2 and Vi &lt;g&gt; y 2 instead of ® F, and ® y t . Consider the



(d) &lt;d&gt;



(d.r.s) (d.r.s)'



mapping from G to F x ® F



(d)



A:(*x)-(® **)®(® *x).

V A/ \(c«&gt;) / (d) \(c&lt;a&gt;) /



It is obviously Z-multilinear; we show that it satisfies conditions (26) for
all &lt;o g Q. This is obvious if o e Q x or w e Q 2 ; otherwise, supposing, in order
to fix the ideas, that p(co) e L x and ct(&lt;o) g L 2 , the values of h °p a and A ° q a
at (#jj are respectively

M®**))®(®**) and (®^)®W®^))

V \&lt;c«&gt;&gt; // (d) \(c&lt;2)) / \(c&lt;») / (d) \ \&lt;c&lt;»&gt; //

which are also equal by definition of F x ® F 2 .

(d)

This being so, let abea Z-multilinear mapping of G into a Z-module H,
satisfying conditions (26) ; we shall define a Z-linear mapping z&gt;:F x (g) F 2 -&gt; H

(d)

262



TENSOR PRODUCT OF FAMILIES OF MULTIMODULES § 3.9

such that u = voh and that will prove our assertion (repeating the argument
of no. 1, Corollary 1 to Proposition 1). For all z 2 = (*x)xeL2 we consider the

"partial" linear mapping of 1 1 G x into H

(28) «(., z 2 ) : (* x )xei4 ^ "(foKei** z a) = "((*0xgl).

Clearly it is Z-multilinear and satisfies conditions (26) for weQj; by defini-
tion there thus exists a Z-linear mapping y x h-&gt; w 1 (y 1 , x 2 ) of F x into H such
that

(29) W X ( ® * x , Z 2 ) = K ( (* x ) x e L l5 Z 2 )

We next consider the mapping

«a:(*x)xeL a M '«'i(-» (*x)&gt;^l 2 )
of 1 1 G x into Hom z (F l3 H) ; it is obviously Z-multilinear and satisfies

XeLa

conditions (26) for to e Q 2 , by virtue of the hypothesis on u and relations
(28) and (29) and taking account of the fact that the elements of the form

&amp; #» generate the Z-module F x . Hence there is a Z-linear mapping

( C U&gt;)

a; 2 :F 2 ^Hom z (F 1 , H)
such that

or also

We now consider, for y x e F x , y 2 e F 2 , the element of H

(31) w(yi,y 2 ) = ("&gt; a (y a ))(yi)-

Clearly w is a Z-bilinear mapping of F x x F 2 into H. We show further that,
for all co e Q.', (assuming, to fix the ideas, that p(co) £ L x and cr(co) e L 2 )

(32) "&gt;(r„(y x ),y a ) = w(y x ,s a {y 2 )).

It suffices to verify this relation when y x (resp. y 2 ) is of the form Vy x K

(c (1) )

(resp. &amp; #*)&gt; since these elements generate the Z-module F x (resp. F 2 ). But
by definition, rj W xA = ® **, where *p (0)) = A&gt;(*p(o») and *£ = * A for

263



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

X ^ p(&lt;o) in Lj; similarly J„(® * x ) = ® *£, where *£ (w) = q^x^) and

#£ = x fc for X ^ &lt;y(«) in L 2 ; using (30) and (31), relation (32) then follows
from (26). Hence there exists a Z-linear mapping v of F x F 2 into H such

(d)

that v(y 1 0y 2 ) = w(y u y 2 ) and it then follows from (30) and (31) that

v o n = u.

The most important special case of the general tensor product defined
above is the following: we start with a family (A i ) 1&lt;l!in _ 1 of rings and a
family (E 4 ) 1&lt;i&lt;n , where Ej is a right A x -module, E n is a left A n _ x module
and for 2 ^ i ^ n — 1, E 4 is an (A i _ 1&gt; A^-bimodule. Then the above defini-
tion is applied as follows: L is the set (1, n), G ( = E i5 Q. is the set the sum of
the Aj (1 &lt; j &lt; « — 1). For to e A t (1 &lt; i &lt; n - 1), take p(&lt;o) = i,
ar(co) = i + I, p a is the endomorphism #H-&gt;-;tto of the Z-module E, and q a
the endomorphism y h-&gt; gj# of the Z-module Ej + x ; the corresponding tensor
product is denoted by

(33) E 2 ® Al E 2 ® A2 E 3 • • • An _ 2 E^ 0^ E n

(a notation where the A 4 may occasionally be suppressed) and the elements

09 x t of this tensor product, for a family (x t ) such that x t e E 4 for 1 ^ i &lt; n,

may be written a: x x 2 • • • x n if no confusion can arise; an analogous
notation is used for a Z-linear mapping v t . Hypothesis (P) holds for every

(c)

partition of (1, «), since the E { are bimodules for 2 &lt; i &lt; n — 1. When n = 3,
we have thus defined the Z-module E A F B G alluded to in no. 8, and re-
covered Proposition 8 (no. 8).

When each of the E t is a multimodule (with, for 2 ^ i ^ n — 1, Aj^ one of the
rings operating on the left and A { one of the rings operating on the right and
analogous conditions for i = 1 and i = n), as in no. 4, a multimodule structure
is defined on E x A1 E 2 • • • A n-i E n with respect to all the rings except
the A f which operate on the E ( (1 &lt; i &lt; »).

In particular, let C be a commutative ring, (E { ) 1;?i&lt;n a family of C-modules.
By giving E x and E n two C-module structures identical with the given struc-
ture and E, for 2 &lt; i ' ^ n — 1 three C-module structures identical with the
given structure, we define on the tensor product

(34) E 1 c E 2 c E 3 ••■ c E ft _ 1 c E n

n G-modules structures which are compatible with one another and which are in

n

fact identical, since for all y e C and (x t ) ell Ej, by definition

(Y*l) ® *2 &lt;8&gt; • ' • ® Xn

= % (y# 2 ) • • • x n = • • • = x x x 2 • • • (y* B ).

264



TENSOR PRODUCT OF FAMILIES OF MULTIMODULES § 3.9

When we speak of the tensor product (34) as a C-module, we shall always
mean with this structure, unless otherwise mentioned, and the tensor product

( 341 is also denoted by &amp; E« if no confusion can arise. For every C-module

n

G, the Z-multilinear mappings of 1 = 1 Ej into G which, for every index i,
satisfy the relation

(35) /fo, . . ., *!_!, yx u x i+1 , ...,*„) = y/(*i&gt; • • •&gt; *n)

for y e C and (x t ) e 1 1 E, are then called C-multilinear and form a C-module

denoted by J^ n (E 1} . . ., E n ; G) ; the universal property of the tensor product
(34) then allows us to define a canonical C-module isomorphism

(36) &amp; n (E lt . . ., E n ; G) -&gt; Hom c (E 1 ® c E 2 ® • • • ® c E B , G)

which associates with every C-multilinear mapping / the C-linear mapping
g such that

/(*!, . . ., x n ) = g(x x &lt;g) * 2 ® • • • &lt;g) x n ).

A C-multilinear mapping of E x x • • • x E n into C is also called an n-linear
form.

Let (F ( ) 1&lt;i&lt;n be another family of C-modules; for every system of n C-

linear mappings u t : E 4 -&gt;■ F t , u x &lt;g) u 2 • • • &lt;g&gt; u n (also denoted by ^9 u\

is a C-linear mapping of

E x ®c E 2 &lt;g&gt; • • • &lt;g&gt; c E n into F x &lt;g) c F 2 &lt;g&gt; • • • ® F n .
Further, (u lt . . . , u n ) i-»- w x ® w 2 ® • • ■ ® u n is a C-multilinear mapping of
II Hom c (E„ F ( ) into

Hom c (E 1 ® c E ® • • • ® c E n , F x ® F 2 ® • • • ® c F n ).

Hence there corresponds canonically to the latter mapping a C-linear mapping
called canonical

(37) Hom c (E 1 , F x ) &lt;g&gt; c Hom c (E 2 , F 2 ) ® • • • ® c Hom c (E n , F n )

-&gt; Hom c (E 1 ®c E 2 ® • • • ® c E„, F x ® c F 2 ® • • . ® c F n )

generalizing that defined in no. 5 for n = 2.

The general associativity property seen earlier can be specialized here as
follows. Given a partition (J fc )i &lt;fc &lt;m of the interval (1, n) of N, let, for each
k, F fc be the tensor product E Jx (g&gt; c E J2 ® • • • ® c E {r , where (i^, . . . , i r ) is

265



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

the strictly increasing sequence of elements of J fc . Then there is a canonical
C-module isomorphism (called "associativity isomorphism")

F x C F 2 • • • C F m -&gt; E x C E 2 ® • • • C E n

which, in the above notation, maps the tensor product

V\ &lt;S&gt; y 2 ® • • ' ® y m , where y k = x h x h • • • x Jr ,

to the tensor product ^ x 2 • • • x n (where x t e E { for all i).

In particular, if n is a permutation of (1, n), writing J fc = {n(k)} for 1 ^ k ^ w,
we obtain a canonical ("commutativity") isomorphism

E n( i) C E n(2) • • • C E*(n) -&gt; E x C E 2 • • • C E n

which maps x nW x^ • • • x n(1i) to at x # 2 • • • x n . We shall
often identify the various tensor products which correspond to one another
under these canonical isomorphisms.

For 1 ^ i ^ n, suppose that E { admits a basis (b l fy Ktetli ; by induction
on n, it follows from no. 7, Corollary 2 to Proposition 7 that the family

(b { £ ® bfl • • • b { £), where (X la . . ., X n ) runs through Y\^ L i} is a



basis of \d E i} sometimes called the tensor product of the bases (b™) in ques-



Remarks. (1) The above remarks concerning the case of modules over a
commutative ring generalize as in no. 5, Remark 2 when there is a tensor
product E x Al E 2 • • • 0a„_i E n where the rings A { are not necessarily
commutative and where, for each i, there is a homomorphism p { : G -&gt; A
of the same commutative ring C such that: (1) pi(C) is contained in the centre
of Aj; (2) for 2 ^ i ; ^ n — 1, the C-module structures on E t obtained using
the homomorphisms p^j and p t coincide. Then a C-module structure is obtained
on E x Al E 2 • • • 0a„_i E n and canonical mappings analogous to (13)
(no. 5), which will be left to the reader to describe.

(2) Let A, B be two rings, E a right A-module, E' a left A-module, F a
right B-module and F' a left B-module. The Z-bilinear mappings of
(E A E') x (F B F') into a Z-module G are then in one-to-one correspondence
with the Z-multilinear mappings f of E x E' x F x F' into G satisfying the
conditions

/ 38 x 5f{xh, x', y, y') = f{x, X*', y, y')

\f(x, x', y\x, y') = /(*, x', y, y.y')

for X e A, (i. e B, x e E, x' e E', y e F, y' e F'. The general constructions given
in this no. reduce the proof of this to defining a canonical Z-module isomorph-
ism between (E A E') Z (F B F') and E A E' Z F B F', which
follows from the associativity property of tensor products of the form (33).

266



THE ISOMORPHISMS § 4.1



§ 4. RELATIONS BETWEEN TENSOR PRODUCTS
AND HOMOMORPHISM MODULES



I. THE ISOMORPHISMS Hom B (E &lt;g&gt; A F, G) -&gt; Hom A (F, Hom B (E, G)) AND
Hom c (E &lt;g) A F, G) -&gt; Hom A (E, Hom (F, G))

Let E be a right A-module, F a left A-module, G a Z-module and H the
Z-module of mappings/ :E x F -&gt; G which are Z-bilinear and satisfy

(1) f(x\, y) = f(x, -ky) for x e E, y e F, X e A.

It has been seen (§ 3, no. 1, Proposition 1) that there exists a canonical Z-
module homomorphism

(2) H-&gt;Hom z (E &lt;g) A F,G).

On the other hand, a left A-module structure has been defined on
Hom z (E, G) and a right A-module structure on Hom z (F, G) (§ 3, no. 3) ;
we may therefore consider the Z-modules Hom A (E, Hom z (F, G)) and
Hom A (F, Hom z (E, G)). A mapping/ of E x F into G is canonically identi-
fied with a mapping of E into the set G p of mappings of F into G (Set Theory,

II, § 5, no. 2) ; by expressing the fact that the latter mapping belongs to
Hom A (E, Hom z (F, G)), we obtain precisely the fact that /is biadditive and
conditions (1) ; whence there is a canonical isomorphism

(3) H -&gt; Hom A (E, Hom z (F, G) )
and similarly there is defined a canonical isomorphism

(4) H -^ Hom A (F, Hom z (E, G) ) .

Suppose now that E and G also have left (resp. right) B-module structures
and that the A-module and B-module structures on E are compatible. Then
E A F has canonically a left (resp. right) B-module structure (§ 3, no. 4)
and on the other hand Hom B (E, G) has canonically a left A-module structure
(§ 1, no. 14). We may therefore consider the Z-modules Hom B (E &lt;g) A F, G)
and Hom A (F, Hom B (E, G)), which are submodules of Hom z (E ® A F, G)
and Hom A (F, Hom z (E, G)) respectively (§2, no. 1, Theorem 2). We ex-
amine under what condition a mapping / e H has as image under the iso-
morphisms (2) and (4) an element of Hom B (E ® A F, G) and an element of
Hom A (E, Hom B (F, G)) respectively; in each of the two cases we find the
same condition

/(P*,y) = P/(*,y)

(resp./(*p,y) =/(*,y)P)
for x e E, y e F, p e B.

267



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Similarly, suppose that F and G are left (resp. right) C-modules and that
the A-module and C-module structures on F are compatible. Then, for a
mapping /gH to have as image under (2) or (3) an element of
Hom c (E ® A F, G) or Hom A (E, Hom c (F, G)) respectively, it is necessary
and sufficient that it satisfy the same condition

f(x&gt;yy) =ff( x &gt;y)

(resp. f(x, yy) = f(x,y)y)

for x e E, y e F, y e G.

We have therefore established the following result (in the notation intro-
duced above) :

Proposition 1. (a) Let E be a (B, A)-bimodule, F a left A-module and G a left
B-module. For every mapping g e Hom B (E &lt;g) A F, G), let g' be the mapping of F
into Hom B (E, G) defined by (g'(y))(x) = g{x &lt;g&gt; y) forxeE,ye F. The mapping
gh+g' is an isomorphism

(5) (3:Hom B (E ® A F, G) -&gt; Hom A (F, Hom B (E, G)).

(b) Let E be a right A-module, F an (A, C)-bimodule and G a right C-module.
For every mapping AeHom c (E (g) A F, G), let h' be the mapping of E into
Hom (F,G) defined by (h'(x))(y) = h(x ® y) for xeE, y eF. The mapping
h&gt;-&gt; h' is an isomorphism

(6) Y :Hom o( E ®a F 3 G) -&gt; Hom A (E, Hom c (F, G)).

In particular B and C may be taken to be a subring T of the centre of the
ring A; then for every T-module G, the three T-modules

Hom r (E &lt;g&gt; A F, G), Hom A (E, Hom r (F, G)), Hom A (F, Hom r (E, G))

are canonically isomorphic to the T-module of T-bilinear mappings of
E x F into G which satisfy (1). More particularly: '

Corollary. If G is a commutative ring and E, F, G three C-modules, then the
C-modules

Hom c (E &lt;g&gt; F, G), Hom (E, Hom c (F, G)),

Hom c (F, Hom c (E, G)), ^ 2 (E 5 F; G)
are canonically isomorphic.

2. THE HOMOMORPHISM E* A F -^ Hom A (E, F)

Let A, B be two rings, E a left A-module, F a left B-module and G an (A, B)-
bimodule. The Z-module Hom A (E, G) has canonically a right B-module struc-

268



the homomorphism E* &lt;g&gt; A F -&gt; Hom A (E, F) § 4.2

ture (§ 1, no. 14) such that («£)(*) = u(x)$ for (3 e B, « e Hom A (E, G), *gE.
On the other hand, G &lt;g) B F has canonically a left A-module structure (§ 3, no. 4).
We shall define a canonical Zrhomomorphism

(7) v : Hom A (E, G) ® B F -&gt; Hom A (E, G &lt;g&gt; B F) .

To this end, we consider, for all y e F and all u e Hom A (E, G), the mapping
v'(m, y) : x h-&gt; u(x) ® y of E onto G &lt;g&gt; B F. It is immediately verified that v'(k, y)
is A-linear and that v' is a Z-bilinear mapping of Hom A (E, G) x F into
Hom A (E, G ® B F); moreover, for all (J eB, v'(u$,y) and v'(m, (3y) are equal,
for (k(*)|3) &lt;g)y = m(*) &lt;g) (py). We conclude (§3, no. 1, Proposition 1) the
existence of the desired homomorphism v such that v(« ® y) is the A-linear
mapping x i-&gt; u(x) ® y.

It is immediately verified that, if E is an (A, (CJ); (DJ))-multimodule, F a
(B, (GJJ); (D£))-multimodule and G an (A, (C?);B, (D£))-multimodule, the
mapping (7) is a ((DJ), (CJ), (CI); (C,'), (D£), (D£))-multimodule homo-
morphism.

Proposition 2. (i) Wfon F w a projective (resp. finitely generated projective)
B-module, the canonical homomorphism (7) is injective (resp. bijective).

(ii) Wfott E w a finitely generated projective A-module, the canonical homomorphism

(7) is bijective.

(i) Fixing E and G, for every left B-module F, we write

T(F) = Hom A (E, G) ® B F, T'(F) = Hom A (E, G ® B F) ;

for every left B-module homomorphism u:F -&gt;¥', we write T(m) = 1 (g) u
(1 here denoting the identity mapping of Hom A (E, G)),

T'(k) = Hom(l E , 1 G &lt;g&gt;u);

on the other hand we write v F instead of v. Then we have the following lemmas :

Lemma 1. For every homomorphism k:F -&gt; F', the diagram

T(F) — ^-&gt; T'(F)

(8) T(«) T'(u)

T(F') -_&gt; T'(F')
is commutative.

The verification is immediate.

269



LINEAR ALGEBRA



Lemma 2. Let M, N be two supplementary submodules in F and i:M
the canonical injections. The diagram

VM@VN &gt; T'(M) © T'(N)

T'(i)+T'(j)



F,j:N



(9)



T(M)©T(N)

T(i)+T(;)



T(F)



-&gt; T'(F)



w commutative and the vertical arrows are bijective.

The commutativity follows from Lemma 1, the other assertions from § 1,
no. 6, Corollary 2 to Proposition 6 and § 3, no. 7, Proposition 7.

Lemma 3. Under the hypotheses of Lemma 2, for v F to be infective (resp. surjective),
it is necessary and sufficient that v M and v N be so.

This follows from Lemma 2 and § 1, no. 6, Corollary 1 to Proposition 6.

Then Lemma 3, together with § 2, no. 2, Proposition 4, shows that it suffices to
consider the case where F is a free module. But, if (6 U ) is a basis of F, every

element of Hom A (E, G) &lt;g) B F may then be written uniquely as 2, w u &lt;g&gt; £ w ,

where u^ e Hom A (E, G) (§ 3, no. 7, Corollary 1 to Proposition 7) ; the image of

this element under v is the A-linear mapping x t-&gt; 2, u^x) &lt;g) ft u ; it cannot be

zero for all x e E unless u^x) = for all x e E and all \i, which is equivalent to
saying that u^ = for all fx; hence v is injective. When also F admits a finite
basis, Lemma 3 shows (by induction on the number of elements in the basis of
F) that to prove that v is surjective, it suffices to do so when F = B s ; but in this
case the two sides of (7) are canonically identified with Hom A (E, G) (§ 3, no. 4,
Proposition 4) and v becomes the identity.

(ii) To show the proposition when E is projective and finitely generated,
this time we fix F and G and write, for every left A-module E,

T(E) = Hom A (E, G) &lt;g) B F, T'(E) = Hom A (E, G ® B F)

and, for every left A-module homomorphism v:E -^ E',

T(v) = Hom(z&gt;, 1 G ) ® 1 F , T(v) = Hom(y, 1 G &lt;g&gt; 1 F );

on the other hand, we write v B instead of v. Then we have the two lemmas:

Lemma 4. For every homomorphism y:E -&gt; E f , the diagram

T(E') -^&gt; T'(E')



(10)

is commutative.
270



T(E)



■&gt; T'(E)



the homomorphism E* &lt;g) A F -&gt; Hom A (E, F) § 4.2

Lemma 5. Let M and N be two supplementary submodules in E and ^:E-&gt;M,
^:E -&gt; N £fo canonical projections. The diagram

T(M)0T(N) -^% T'(M)0T'(N)



T(tf+T( g )



T'{p)+T'(q)



T(E) ► T'(E)

is commutative and the vertical arrows are bijective.

They are proved as Lemmas 1 and 2, taking account of § 1, no. 6, Corollary 2
to Proposition 6, § 2, no. 1, Proposition 1 and § 3, no. 7, Proposition 7.

The remainder of the proof then proceeds as in (i) and is reduced to the
case where E = A s ; the two sides of (7) are then canonically identified with
G (g) B F and v becomes the identity.

In particular take B = A and G the (A, A)-bimodule J± d (§ 3, no. 4), so that
the right A-module Hom A (E, Aj) is just the dual E* of E and ( s A d ) ® A F is
canonically identified with F (§ 3, no. 4, Proposition 4). Homomorphism (7)
then becomes a canonical Z-homomorphism

(11) 6:E*® A F^Hom A (E,F)

and 0(#* y) is the linear mapping of E into F

x t-&gt; (x, x*~)y.

Remark (1). The characterization of projective A-modules given in §2, no. 6,
Proposition 12, can also be expressed as follows: for a left A-module E to be
projective, it is necessary and sufficient that the canonical homomorphism

E :E* &lt;8&gt; A E -&gt; Hom A (E, E) = End A (E)

be such that 1 E belongs to the image qfQ E .

Corollary, (i) When F is a projective (resp. finitely generated projective) module,
the canonical homomorphism (11) is injective (resp. bijective).

(ii) When E is a finitely generated projective module, the canonical homomorphism
(11) is bijective.

Even when E and F are both finitely generated, is not necessarily sur-
jective, as is shown by the example A = Z, E = F = Z/2Z; the right
hand side of (11) is non-zero but E* = 0. On the other hand, examples
can be given where E is free, but (11) is neither injective nor surjective
(Exercise 3(6)).

271



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

When E admits a finite basis (*,)&gt; the inverse isomorphism 8 _1 of 8 can be
found explicitly as follows. Let(«?) be the dual basis of (e t ) (§2, no. 6);

for all u e Hom(E, F) and all x = £, %&amp; with ^ e A,

«(*) = Z liU{e { ) = Z &lt;x, efyu{e x )
i »

and therefore a = Z 8(«f «('i))&gt; in otner words

(12) e- 1 ^) = 2 «f &lt;8) «(*«).

In particular, if further F = E, it is seen that the image under E * of the

identity mapping 1 B is the element A, ef &lt;g) «„ which is therefore independent

of the basis (e t ) considered in E.

Note on the other hand that when E is a finitely generated projective module
the ring structure on End A (E) can be transported by 0b" 1 to E* &lt;g&gt; A E; it is
immediately verified that, for x } y in E, x*, y* in E*, in the ring End A (E),

(13) e B (** ® x) o e E ( y * ® y) = e E (( y *&lt;y, **» ® x).

Remark (2). Let E be a right A-module; replacing E by E* in (11), we obtain
a canonical Z-homomorphism

(14) E** ® A F -&gt; Hom A (E*, F).

On the other hand, there is a canonical A-homomorphism c E :E-&gt;E**,
whence there is a Z-homomorphism c E &lt;g&gt; 1 F :E ® A F-&gt;E** ® A F; com-
posing the latter with the homomorphism (14), we hence obtain a canonical
Z-homomorphism

(15) 0':E ® A F^Hom A (E*,F)
such that 0'(* ® y) is the linear mapping

x* h&gt; (x, x*/y.

If E and F are projective modules, the mapping (15) is injective. For c E is then
injective (§ 2, no. 7, Corollary 4 to Proposition 13) and as F is projective, the
Z-homomorphism c E ® l p : E ® A F -&gt; E** ® A F is also injective (§ 3, no. 7,
Corollary 6 to Proposition 7) ; finally, it has been seen (Proposition 2) that the
homomorphism (14) is injective, whence the conclusion.

If E is projective and jinitely generated, the mapping (15) is bijective for the two
mappings of which it is composed are then bijective (§ 2, no. 7, Corollary 4 to
Proposition 13 and Proposition 2 above).

272



TRACE OF AN ENDOMORPHISM § 4.3

3. TRACE OF AN ENDOMORPHISM

Let C be a commutative ring and E a C-module. The mapping
(#*, x) h-&gt; &lt;#, #*&gt; of E* x E into C is then C-bilinear, since, for all y e C,
&lt;Y#&gt; #*&gt; = ~((. x &gt; **&gt; and &lt;#, #*y&gt; = &lt;*&gt; **&gt;y; we derive a canonical C-linear
mapping

(16) t:E* ® c E-^C

such that t(#* ® #) = &lt;#, #*&gt; (§ 3, no. 5). Suppose now also that E is a. finitely
generated projective G-module; the canonical isomorphism (11) of no. 2 is then a
C-module isomorphism and we can therefore define by transporting the struc-
ture a canonical linear form Tr = to Q^ 1 on the C-module End c (E). For all
u e End c (E) the scalar Tr(u) is called the trace of the endomorphism u; every
u e End c (E) can be written (in general in an infinity of ways) in the form

x i-&gt;- 2i, &lt;#, x* s )y i where x* e E* and y i e E ( by virtue of no. 2, Corollary to
Proposition 2; then

(17) Tr(a) = 2 &lt;y» *?&gt; (cf. § 10, no. 11).

By definition,

(18) Tr(« + v) = Tr(w) + Tr(o)

(19) Tr( Y w) = yTr(u)
for u, v in End (E) and yeC. Moreover:

Proposition 3. Let C be a commutative ring, E, F two finitely generated projective
C-modules and m:E — &gt; F and v:F -&gt; E /wo /i'/z&amp;w mappings; then

(20) Tr(»o M ) = Tr(ao»).

The two mappings (a, o) H&gt;Tr(ao»), («, y) t-&gt; Tr(» o m) of

Hom c (E, F) x Hom c (F, E)

into C are C-bilinear; it therefore suffices to verify (20) when u is of the form
x h-&gt; &lt;#, a*&gt;o and v of the form y ■-&gt; &lt;y, 0*&gt;a, with a e E, a* e E*, ieF,
£* e F*. But then v ° u is the mapping at &gt;-&gt; &lt;#, a*}(b, o*&gt;a and koc the map-
ping y i-&gt; &lt;y, b*~)(a, a*}b. Formula (17) shows that the values of the two sides
of (20) are equal to &lt;a, a*~)(b, b*y.

Corollary. Ifu li ... i u p are endomorphisms o/E, then

Tr(w x o u 2 o • . • o Up) = Tr(u t o u i + 1 ° • • • o u p o u x o . . . o «,_!)
/or 1 ^ i &lt; p ("invariance of the trace under cyclic permutation").

273



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

It suffices to apply (20) to the product

(«! o « 2 o • • ■ o U t _ x ) o (Kj o U i+1 o • . . o U p ).

Note that on the other hand it is not necessarily true that
Tr(« o v °w) = Tr(tt o w o v)
for three endomorphisms u, v, w of E.

4. THE HOMOMORPfflSM Hom c (E 1} F x ) ® c Hom c (E 2 , F 2 ) -&gt;
-&gt; Hom (E 1 &lt;g&gt; E 2 , F x ® F a )

Let C be a commutative ring and E l5 E 2 , F 1} F 2 four C-modules; in § 3, no. 5,
formula (13) we defined a canonical G-module homomorphism

(21) X : Hom(E ls F x ) &lt;g&gt; Hom(E 2 , F 2 ) -&gt; Hom(E 1 &lt;g&gt; E 2 , F x &lt;g&gt; F a ) .

Proposition 4. W^^n one of the ordered pairs (E 1} E 2 ), (E l5 F x ), (E 2 , F 2 ) con-
sists of finitely generated projective C-modules, the canonical homomorphism (21) is
bijective.

It is obviously sufficient to perform the proof for the ordered pairs (E l5 F 2 )
and(E l5 E 2 ).

We consider first the case of the ordered pair (E l5 F x ) ; we fix E 2 , F lt F 2
and write for every G-module T(E) = Hom(E, F x ) ® Hom(E 2&gt; F 2 ) and
T'(E) = Hom(E &lt;g&gt; E 2 , F x ® F 2 ) and, for every C-homomorphism v : E -&gt; E',

T(o) = Hom(z;, l Fl ) ® l H om ( B 2 ,F 2 )
and

T» = Hom(&amp; (g) l Ea , l Fl ® F2 )-

Then Lemmas 4 am/ 5 (no. 2) (where v is replaced by X) are valid and are
proved by completely analogous methods.

We next fix E 2 and F 2 and this time write, for every G-module F,
T(F) = Hom(C, F) &lt;g&gt; Hom(E 2 , F 2 ) and T'(F) = Hom(G ® E 2 , F ® F 2 )
and, for every C-homomorphism u : F -&gt; F',

T(«) = Hom(l c , u) l H om(E 2 ,p 2 )
and

T'(«) = Hom(l c ® l Ba , u ® 1 F2 ).

This time it is immediately verified that Lemmas 1 and 2 (no. 2) (where X always
replaces v) are valid.

This being so, we show the proposition first when E x = C and F x is projec-
tive and finitely generated. The argument of no. 2 (which rests on Lemmas 1
and 2), together with the above remarks, reduces this to proving the proposition
when also F x = G; then Hom(E 1} FJ, E x ® E 2 and Fi ® F 2 are identified
with C, E 2 and F 2 respectively (§ 3, no. 4, Proposition 4) ; the two sides of (21)

274



the homomorphism Hom c (E l5 F x ) ® c Hom(E 2 , F 2 ) § 4.4

are then both canonically identified with Hom(E 2 , F 2 ) and, after these identi-
fications, it is verified that X becomes the identity.

We now suppose that F x is projective and finitely generated; the argument
of no. 2 (depending this time on Lemmas 4 and 5) reduces the proof for E x any
finitely generated projective module to the case where Ej = G, that is to the
first case dealt with.

For the ordered pair (E l5 E 2 ), the procedure is similar, this time applying
Lemmas 4 and 5 twice; we leave the details to the reader.

Note that when E x = C (I) , E 2 = C (J) are free (finitely generated or not),
then Hom(E!, F x ) = F^, Hom(E 2 , F 2 = F^ and

Hom(E 1 &lt;S&gt; E 2 , F x ® F 2 ) = (Fj ® F 2 ) lxJ

to within canonical isomorphisms and (21) is then identical with a special
case of the canonical homomorphism (22) of § 3, no. 7.

When E 2 = G, the canonical homomorphism (21) gives, after identifying
Hom(E 2 , F 2 ) with F 2 and Ej ® E 2 with E l5 a canonical homomorphism

(22) Hom(E, F) ® G -» Hom(E, F ® G)

for any three C-modules E, F, G which is just the homomorphism (7) of no. 2
for A = B = G.

Note that when F = G the canonical homomorphism (22) again gives
(11) (no. 2) for the case of a commutative ring.

Suppose now that F x = F 2 = C; as F x &lt;g&gt; F 2 is identified with C, there
is this time a canonical homomorphism

(23) fx:E*&lt;g&gt;F*-&gt;(E®F)*

for two C-modules E, F; for x* e E*, y* e F*, the image of x* &lt;g&gt;y* under
the canonical homomorphism (23) is the linear form u on E ® F such that

(24) u{x &lt;g) y) = &lt;*, **&gt;&lt;#, y*&gt;.

Moreover, if E l5 E 2 , F l5 F 2 are four C-modules, f: E x -&gt;■ E 2 , g:Fi-&gt;F 2
two linear mappings, it follows immediately from (24) that the diagram



E*®F* -JU (E 2 ®F 2 )*



(25) tfQtg



kf ® g-&gt;



E*0F? ► (ExfcFO*



is commutative.



275



LINEAR ALGEBRA



Corollary 1. If one of the modules E, F is projective and finitely generated, the
canonical homomorphism (23) is bijective.

Corollary 2. Let E l5 E 2 be two finitely generated projective C-modules, u x an
endomorphism of^ x and u 2 an endomorphism ofE 2 ; then

(26) Tr( Ml &lt;g&gt; u 2 ) = Tr( Ml )Tr( M2 ).

By linearity, it suffices to consider the case where u x is of the form
*i *-»■ &lt;*i&gt; **&gt;#i and « 2 of the form x 2 v-&gt; &lt;# 2 , xf}y 2 ; then the image of x 1 &lt;g) x 2
under u x &lt;g&gt; u 2 is by definition

&lt;*i&gt; **&gt;&lt;*2, xfy{y x ®y 2 ) = &lt;x x &lt;g&gt; x 2) xf &lt;g&gt; x%)(y x &lt;g&gt; y a )

a;* &lt;g&gt; x* being canonically identified under (i. with an element of (E x ® E 2 )*.
As &lt;y x &lt;g&gt; y 2 , *i &lt;8&gt; **&gt; = &lt;yi&gt; ** Xy2&gt; **&gt;&gt; formula (26) follows in this case
from (17).

Remark. If E, F, G are any three C-modules, it is immediately verified that
the diagram

E* &lt;g&gt; F* &lt;g&gt; G* -^i- (E &lt;g&gt; F)* &lt;g&gt; G*



t*



(27) i ® n

&gt;

E* &lt;g) (F ® G)* &gt; (E &lt;g&gt; F &lt;g&gt; G)*

is commutative, by virtue of formula (24).

We note also that, without any hypothesis on the C-modules E, F, there
are canonical isomorphisms

(28) (E&lt;g&gt;F)*-»Hom(E,F*)

(29) (E &lt;g&gt; F) * -&gt; Hom(F, E*)

which are just the isomorphism (6) and (5) of no. 1 for G = C,
A = B = C.

Thus a canonical one-to-one correspondence has been defined between
the bilinear forms on E x F, the homomorphisms of E into F* and the homomorph-
isms of F into E* : if u (resp. v) is a homomorphism of E into F* (resp. of
F into E*), the corresponding bilinear form is given by

(x, y) h-&gt; (y, «(*)&gt; (resp. (x, y) &gt;-&gt; &lt;*, v(y)».
276



EXTENSION OF THE RING OF SCALARS OF A MODULE §5.1



§ 5. EXTENSION OF THE RING OF SCALARS

1. EXTENSION OF THE RING OF SCALARS OF A MODULE

Let A, B be two rings and p: A -&gt; B a ring homomorphism; we consider the
right A-module p*(B d ) denned by this homomorphism (§1, no. 13); this
A-module also has a left B-module structure, namely that of B s and, as
b'(bp(a)) = (b'b)p(a) for a e A, b, b' in B, these two module structures on B
are compatible (§ 1, no. 14). This allows us, for every left A-module E, to
define a left B-module structure on the tensor product p,c(B d ) &lt;g) A E such that
P'(P ® x) = (p'(*) &lt;g) x for p, (3' in B and x e E (§ 3, no. 3). This left B-module
is said to be derived from E by extending the ring ofscalars to B by means of p and it is
denoted by p*(E) or E (B) if no confusion arises.

Proposition 1. For every left A-module E, the mapping §\x*-&gt;\ x of E into
the A-module p + (p*(E)) is A-linear and the set &lt;j&gt;(E) generates the B-module p*(E).
Further, for every left B-module F and every A-linear mapping f of E into the A-
module p*(F), there exists one and only one B-linear mapping f of p*(E) into F such
that/ {I ® x) = fix) for all xeE.

B can be considered as a (B, A)-bimodule by means of p; then there is a
canonical Z-module isomorphism

(1) Hom B (B ® A E, F) -&gt; Hom A (E, Hom B (B s , F))

as has been seen in § 4, no. 1, Proposition 1 . But the left A-module Hom B (B s , F)
is canonically identified with p*(F) : for, by definition (§ 1, no. 14), there corre-
sponds to an element y eF the homomorphism 0(y) : B s -&gt; F such that
(6(y))(l) = y; for all XeA, there thus corresponds to p(A)#eF the homo-
morphism y. &gt;-&gt; ^p(X)y of B s into F, which is just X0(y) for the left A-module
structure on Hom B (B s , F) (§1, no. 14). Using this identification, we obtain
therefore a canonical Z-module isomrophism, the inverse of (1)

(2) 8:Hom A (E, p,(F)) -^ Hom B (p*(E), F)

and it follows immediately from the definitions that if 8(f) =f then
f(\ &lt;S&gt; x) =f(x) for all xeE. In particular, the mapping &lt;j) E :#&gt;-&gt;l (g) x
is just

(3) &lt;i&gt; E = ^(W)).

Proposition 1 is therefore proved. The mapping &lt;|&gt; E :E -&gt; p # (p*(E)) is
called canonical.

277



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Remarks. (1) Proposition 1 shows that the ordered pair consisting of E (B)
and &lt;[&gt; E is a solution of the universal mapping problem (Set Theory, IV, § 3,
no. 1), where S is the species of left B-module structures (the morphisms
being B-linear mappings) and the oc-mappings are the A-linear mappings
of E into a B-module.

(2) If E is an (A, (Cj); (D;))-multimodule and F a (B, (C£); (D£))-
multimodule, then the isomorphism (2) is linear with respect to the
((Dj, (C£); (Cj), (D£))-multimodule structures of the two sides (§ 1, no. 14
and § 3, no. 4).

(3) Let E be a left A-module, a a two-sided ideal of A and p : A — &gt; A/a
the canonical homomorphism. In the notation of § 3, no. 6, Corollary 2 to
Proposition 6, the A-module E/aE is annihilated by a and therefore has
canonically a left (A/a)-module structure (§ 1, no. 12); it is immediate that
the canonical mapping re: p*(E) -&gt; E/aE defined in § 3, no. 6, Corollary 2
to Proposition 6 is an isomorphism for the (A/a) -module structures.

Corollary. Let E, E' be two left A-modules ; for every A-linear mapping u : E -&gt; E',
v = 1 B u is the unique B-linear mapping which renders commutative the diagram

E &gt; E (B)



E' — ■&gt; E ( ' B)

&lt;Pe'

where &lt;{&gt; E and &lt;j&gt; E / are the canonical mappings.

It suffices to apply Proposition 1 to the A-homomorphism &lt;j&gt; E , o u:E -&gt; E ( ' B) .

The mapping v defined in the above corollary is denoted by p*(«) or « (B) .
If E" is a third left A-module and z&gt;:E'-&gt;E" an A-linear mapping, it is
immediate that

(V o u) m = 0(B) o « (B) .

Extending the ring of operators of a module is a transitive operation; to be
precise :

Proposition 2. Let p:A-&gt;B, c:B-»G be ring homomorphisms. For every left
A-module E, there exists one and only one C-homomorphism

(4) a*(p*(E))-&gt;(aop)*(E)

mapping l&lt;g)(l&lt;g&gt;A:)fol&lt;g&gt; x for all x g E and this homomorphism is bijective.

The underlying Z-modules of &lt;r*(p*(E)) and (a o p)*(E) are respectively
C (g&gt; B (B ® A E) and C ® A E. There exists a canonical Z-isomorphism
G ® B (B (g) A E) -&gt; (G ® B B) &lt;g) A E (§ 3, no. 8, Proposition 8), which is also
a C-isomorphism for the left G-module structures on both sides. Moreover, the

278



EXTENSION OF THE RING OF SCALARS OF A MODULE §5.1

G-module G ® B B is canonically identified with the G-module C s under the
isomorphism which maps y (g) (3 to ya((3) (§ 3, no. 4, Proposition 4) and this iso-
morphism is also an isomorphism for the right A-module structure on G ® B B
defined by p and the right A-module structure on G defined by a ° p. Thus a
canonical isomorphism

(C ® B B) &lt;g&gt; A E-&gt;C ® A E

is obtained and, composing it with the isomorphism

G ® B (B &lt;g&gt; A E) -&gt; (G &lt;g) B B) ® A E

defined earlier, the desired canonical isomorphism is obtained.

If (j), &lt;j&gt;' and cj&gt;" denote the canonical mappings E-&gt; p*(E), p*(E-*-) a*(p*(E))
and E— &gt; (c ° p)*(E), (•&gt;' o (J&gt; is identified with &lt;j/ under the canonical iso-
morphism of Proposition 2.

Proposition 3. Let A, B be two commutative rings, p:A-&gt; B a ring homomorphism
and E, E' two A-modules. There exists one and only one B-homomorphism

(5) E (B) ® B E ( ' B) ^(E ® A E') (B)

mapping (1 &lt;g&gt; #) &lt;g&gt; (1 ® #') to 1 ® (x ® x') for xeE, x' e E', and this homo-
morphism is bijective.

The left hand side of (5) may be written (B &lt;g&gt; A E) ® B (B &lt;g) A E') and is
identified with (E ® A B) ® B (B ® A E') since A and B are commutative;
the latter product is identified successively with E ® A (B ® B B) ® A E',
E &lt;g) A (B ® A E'), E &lt;g) A (E' ® A B) and finally (E &lt;g&gt; A E') ® A B, using the
associativity of the tensor product (§ 3, no. 8, Proposition 8), Proposition 4, § 3,
no. 4, and the commutativity of A and B. The desired isomorphism is the com-
position of the successive canonical isomorphisms.

Clearly if S is a generating system of E, the image of S under the canonical
mapping E -&gt; E (B) is a generating system of E (B) ; in particular, if E is a finitely
generated A-module, E (B) is a finitely generated B-module.

Proposition 4. Let E be an A-module admitting a basis (a K ) keIj ; if §:x h-&gt;- 1 ® x
is the canonical mapping of E into p*(E), then (&lt;}&gt;( fl ;0)xeL is a basis of p*(E). If p
is injective, so is &lt;}&gt;.

The first assertion follows immediately from § 3, no. 7, Corollary 1 to Pro-
position 7. Also, for every family (y X6L of elements of A of finite support,

&lt;}&gt;( 2-, Z^aA = 2, p(50^( fl an d the relation &lt;[&gt;( 2, ^aA = is therefore
equivalent to p(£x) = for all X £ L, whence the second assertion.

Corollary. For every projective A-module E, the B-module p* (E) is projective. If
further p is injective, the canonical mapping ofE into p*(E) is injective.

279



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

By hypothesis there exists a free A-module M containing E and in which
E admits a supplement F. It follows immediately from § 3, no. 7, Proposi-
tion 7 that M (B) is identified with the direct sum of E (B) and F (B) and if &lt;j&gt; and
&lt;J&gt; are the canonical mappings E -&gt; E (B) and F -&gt; F (B) , the canonical mapping
M-&gt;-M (B) is just x + y h-&gt; §(x) + ty(y). The corollary follows immediately
from Proposition 4 applied to the A-module M.

When E is a right A-module, we write similarly p*(E) = E &lt;g) A p*(B s ), B
being considered this time as an (A, B)-bimodule and the right B-module
structure on p*(E) being such that (* &lt;g&gt; (3) p' = x &lt;g) (pp') for p eB' p' gB
and x e E. We leave to the reader the task of stating for right modules the
results corresponding to those of this no. and the following.

Remark (4). Consider the left A-module p*(B s ) defined by p and for every
left A-module E, consider the Z-module

(6) p(E) = Hom A (p*(B s ), E).

As p*(B s ) has a right B-module structure, a left B-module structure is derived
on p(E) (§ 1, no. 14) such that, if u e p(E) and b' eB, b'u is the homo-
morphism b i-&gt; u(bb') of p* (B s ) into E. We further define an A-linear mapping,
called canonical

(7) VP*(P(E))-&gt;E

associating with every homomorphism kg p(E) the element u(l) in E. As
B can be considered as an (A, B)-bimodule by means of p, for every left
B-module F, there is a canonical Z-module isomorphism

Hom A ( PH! (B s ) &lt;g&gt; B F, E) -&gt; Hom B (F, Hom A ( P!lc (B s ), E))

(§ 1, no. 1, Proposition 1). As the left A-module p*(B s ) &lt;g) B F is canonically
identified with p*(F) by virtue of § 3, no. 4, Proposition 4, we obtain a
canonical Z-module isomorphism, the inverse of the above

(8) Hom B (F, p(E)) -&gt; Hom A ( PHt (F), E)

which associates with every B-linear mapping g of F into p(E) the com-
posite mapping tj o g, considered as an A-linear mapping of p*(F) into E.
In particular, under the hypotheses of Proposition 2, if F is replaced by
&lt;j # (C s ), we obtain a canonical C-isomorphism

(9) g(p(E))-*(ao P )~(E).

2. RELATIONS BETWEEN RESTRICTION AND EXTENSION OF THE RING OF
SGALARS

Let p : A — &gt; B be a ring homomorphism. For every left A-module E, a canonical
A-linear mapping

(10) (j&gt; E :E-^ Psls (p*(E))

was defined in no. 1 such that &lt;j&gt; E (*) = I &lt;S&gt; x. We consider now a left B-

280



RELATIONS BETWEEN RESTRICTION AND EXTENSION OF RING OF SCALARS § 5.2

module F and apply Proposition 1 (no. 1) to the A homomorphism
lp*(F) : P*(F) -&gt; P*(F) : we obtain a B-linear mapping

(11) ^:P*(P*(F))-&gt;F

equal to 8(l p *(p)) and such therefore that, for all yeF and all |3eB,

Proposition 5. Let E be a left A-module and F a left B-module; the composite
mappings

&lt; 12 &gt; ^ E &gt; W ^^("'W)) "W P * (E)

ar« respectively equal to the identity mappings of p*(E) anrf P*(F).

We give the proof, for example, for (12) ; for all x e E, the mapping p*(&lt;j&gt; B )
maps 1 ® x to the element 1 ® (1 ® #) and the mapping ^p* (B) maps
1 &lt;8&gt; (1 &lt;8&gt; x) to the element 1 ® #; the conclusion follows from the fact that
the elements of the form 1 ® x generate the B-module p* (E) ; the proof is
even simpler for (13).

Corollary. The mappings p*(&lt;t&gt; E ) an ^ ^p'cf) are infective and respectively identify
p*(E) with a direct factor of p*(p H .(p*(E))) and p + (F) with a direct factor of

P*(P*(P*(F)))-

This is a consequence of Proposition 5 and § 1, no. 9, Corollary 2 to
Proposition 15.

Proposition 6. Let E be a left A-module and F a right B-module. There exists one
and only one 2-homomorphism

(14) p»(F) ® A E-^F® B p*(E)

mapping y ® x to y &lt;g&gt; (1 ® x) for all x e E and all y e F and this homomorphism
is bijective.

By definition the right hand side of (14) is F ® B (B ® A E), where B is
considered as a (B, A)-bimodule, and there is a canonical Z-isomorphism
(F &lt;g) B B) &lt;g) A E -&gt; F &lt;g) B (B ® A E) defined in § 3, no. 8, Proposition 8; on the
other hand, the canonical isomorphism F -&gt; F ® B B of § 3, no. 4, Proposition
4 is an isomorphism for the right A-module structures on the two sides, defined
by p. Whence the desired isomorphism.

When A and B are commutative, the isomorphism (14) is an A-module isomorph-
ism

p,(F) ® A E-&gt; P!lt (F ® B p*(E)).

281



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

3. EXTENSION OF THE RING OF OPERATORS OF A HOMOMORPHISM
MODULE

Let A be a commutative ring, B a ring, p:A-&gt;B a ring homomorphism and
E, F two A-modules; as B is an (A, A)-bimodule (by means of p) and F can
be considered as an (A, A)-bimodule, there are on the Z-module B ® A F
two A-module structures, under which respectively a{b ® y) = (p{a)b) ®y
and a(b (giy) = b ® {ay) for aeA, b eB, y eF. We shall denote the two
A-modules thus denned by G' and G" ; G' is moreover just the A-module

P*(P*(F))-

This being so, in the definition of the canonical homomorphism of § 4, no. 2,
formula (7), we replace B by A, the B-module F by the ring B considered as an
A-module by means of p and G by F considered as an (A, A)-bimodule; as A
is commutative, we may write the canonical X-homomorphism obtained as

(15) B &lt;g) A Hom A (E, F) -^ Hom A (E, G*).

On the other hand (no. 1, formula (2)), there is a canonical Z-isomorphism

(16) Hom A (E, G') = Hom A (E, p*(p*(F))) -&gt; Hom B (p*(E), p*(F)).

Suppose now that p(A) is contained in the centre of B, in which case p is
also called a central homomorphism *(or p is said to define an A-algebra struc-
ture on B, cf. Ill, § 1, no. 3)*. Then the A-module structures of G' and G"
are identical and composing the homomorphisms (16) and (15) we thus obtain
a canonical Z-homomorphism

(17) &lt;o:B ® A Hom A (E, F) -&gt; Hom B (E (B) , F (B) )

which is characterized by the fact that, for all u e Hom A (E, F) and all b 6 B

(18) u(6 &lt;g&gt; u) = r b ® u,

where r b denotes right multiplication by b in B.

Moreover, the hypothesis that &lt;o is a central homomorphism implies that
(bb')p(a) = bp(a))b' for b, b' in B and a g A; in other words the right B-module
structure of B d is compatible with its A-module structure; it thus defines on
B ® A Hom A (E, F) a right B-module structure (§ 3, no. 4) and also on
F (B) = B ® A F, and finally, as the left and right B-module structures on F (B)
are compatible, a right B-module structure is also obtained on Hom B (E (B) , F (B) )
(§ 1, no. 14). Then it is immediately verified that (17) is a right B-module
homomorphism for these structures.

Proposition 7. Let A be a commutative ring, B a ring, p:A-&gt;B a central homo-
morphism and E, F two A-modules.

282



DUAL OF A MODULE OBTAINED BY EXTENSION OF SCALARS § 5.4

(i) If Bis a projective (resp. finitely generated projective) A-module, the homomorph-
ism (17) is injective (resp. bijective).

(ii) If E is a finitely generated projective A-module, the homomorphism (17) is
bijective.

As (16) is bijective, the proposition follows from § 4, no. 2. Proposition 2,
applied to the canonical homomorphism (15).

4. DUAL OF A MODULE OBTAINED BY EXTENSION OF SCALARS

Let A, B be two rings, p:A-&gt;B a ring homomorphism, E a left A-module
and E* its dual. We shall define a canonical B-linear mapping

(19) u B :(E*) ( B)-^(E (B ))*.

The left hand side of (19) may be written as Hom A (E, A) &lt;g) A p*(B s ), where,
in Hom A (E, A), A is considered as an (A, A)-bimodule. Then there is a
canonical Z-homomorphism (§ 4, no. 2, formula (7))

v:Hom A (E, A) ® A p,(B.) -&gt;Hom A (E, A ® A p„(B,)) = Hom A (E, p*(B s ))

with the identification given by the canonical isomorphism of § 3, no. 4,
Proposition 4. On the other hand, the right hand side of (19) may be written
as Hom B (p Hc (B d ) ® A E, B s ); as B is a (B, A)-bimodule, there is a canonical
Z-isomorphism (§ 4, no. 1, Proposition 1)

p:Hom B ( Ps|e (B d ) ® A E, B s ) -&gt; Hom A (E, Hom B (B s , B,))

and Hom B (B s , B s ) is canonically identified, as an A-module, with p*(B s )
(see the proof of no. 1, Proposition 1). Taking account of these identifi-
cations, we obtain the homomorphism u E ; it is easily verified that this homo-
morphism is characterized by the equation

(20) &lt;£ ® X, U E (X* &lt;g) 7))&gt; = 5p«*, **»Y),

for x e E, x* e E*, £, •/] in B, which shows immediately that u E is B-linear. More-
over, for every A-linear mapping u : E -&gt; F the diagram

(F*) (B ) -^ (F(B))*
(M(B) '("(B))

(E*)(B&gt; — - &gt; (E (B) )*

is commutative.

Proposition 8. If one of the A-modules E, p*(B s ) is projective and finitely generated,
the homomorphism u E is bijective.

This follows from the above and § 4, no. 2, Proposition 2.

283



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Suppose in particular that E is a finitely generated free A-module and let
Wi&lt;i&lt;«bea basis of E and (ef) the dual basis; then the canonical isomorph-
ism (19) maps the basis (e* &lt;g&gt; 1) of (E*) (B) to the dual basis of the basis
(l®* t )ofE (B) .

5. A CRITERION FOR FINITENESS

Proposition 9. Let B be a ring, A a subring ofB and P a projective left A-module.
Then, {/*P (B) is a finitely generated B-module, P is itself a finitely generated A-module.

We know (§2, no. 6, Proposition 12) that there exists a family (a x ) Ketl
of elements of P and a family (a*)^ ell of elements of the dual P* such that,

for all x e P, the family «#, a*» is of finite support and x = Z, &lt;#, a£)a K .

Since P (B) is finitely generated, there exists a finite family (yi) ie i of elements
of P such that P (B) is generated by the elements 1 ® y t . For each index i,
the family «y„ af}) has finite support. Hence there exists a finite subset H
of L such that &lt;y ( , a%} = for i e I and X £ H. Since

&lt;i ® y t , 14 ® «*&gt; = &lt;y» «*&gt;&gt;

it follows that ld 3 &lt;g&gt; af = for X £ H. Hence, for all # £ P,

&lt;*, fljf&gt; = &lt;1 x, 1 B ® afy =

for X £ H. This shows that the A-module P is generated by the a x such that
XeH.



§ 6. INVERSE AND DIRECT LIMITS OF MODULES

Throughout this paragraph, I will denote a non-empty preordered set and a ^ $ the
preorder relation on I. Unless otherwise mentioned, the inverse and direct systems have
indexing set I.

1. INVERSE LIMITS OF MODULES

Let (Aa, &lt;J&gt; aB ) be an inverse system of rings (I, § 10, no. 1), (E a ,/ aB ) an inverse
system of commutative groups (written additively) (I, § 10, no. 1) and suppose
that each E a has a left A^-module structure; moreover suppose that for a ^ ^
(/ aB , &lt;j&gt; aB ) is a dimorphism of E B into E a (§ 1, no. 13), in other words that

(1) fxaO^fiXfi) == ^apC^pJ/aPV^p)?

for # B e E B , X B e A B ; then it follows from I, § 10, no. 2 that E = lim E a has
a left module structure over A = lim A^. For all a e I, let/: E -»■ E a , § a : A -&gt; A a
be the canonical mappings; then (f a , &lt;J) a ) is a dimorphism of E into E a . We

284



INVERSE LIMITS OF MODULES § 6.1

shall say that (E a ,/ aP ) is an inverse system of left A^-modules and that the A-
module E is its inverse limit.

Let (E;,/ a ' ) be another inverse system of left A^-modules and, for all a,
let t/ a :E;^E a be an A-linear mapping, these mappings forming an inverse
system; then u = lim w a is an A-linear mapping of lim E„ into lim E a .

Moreover:

Proposition 1. Let (E a ,/ aB ), (E;,/ a ' p ), (K,fZv) be three inverse systems of A a -
modules and (u a ), (y a ) two inverse systems of A-linear mappings such that the sequences

o — &gt; e; -X E a -^&gt; K

are exact for all a. Then, writing u = lim H a , v = lim v a , the sequence

&gt; lim E; — "-&gt; lim E a — "-&gt; lim E£

is exact.

As u~ x (0) = {0} for all a, it follows from Set Theory, III, § 7, no. 2, Proposi-
tion 2 that w _1 (°) = (°}&gt; hence u is injective; further, the w a (E;) form an
inverse system of subsets of the E a and thus M(limE;) = limw a (E;). As
M a (E;) = v^{0) by hypothesis, jr^O) = Hmw a (E;) = «(HmE;) (&amp;t 77*&lt;?ory,
III, § 7, no. 2, Proposition 2), which completes the proof.

Remarks. (1) Proposition 1 and its proof are valid for arbitrary groups,
except for change of notation.

(2) Note that if there are exact sequences

o — ► e; -±+ E a -^&gt; E* — &gt;
it does not necessarily follow that the sequence

&gt; lim E; -^&gt; lim E a -% lim E£ &gt;

is exact; in other words, the inverse limit of an inverse system of surjective
linear mappings is not necessarily surjective (cf. Exercise 1).

Suppose now that the A a are equal to the same ring A and the &lt;j&gt; a(} to 1 A ;
then for every inverse system (E B ,/ aB ) of A-modules, E = Hm E a is an A-
module. Let F be an A-module and, for all a, let « a :F -&gt; E a be an A-linear
mapping such that (w a ) is an inverse system of mappings; then u = lim u a
is an A-linear mapping of F into lim E a . Conversely, for every A-linear mapping
»:F-&gt;limE a , the family of v u =/«°» is an inverse system of A-linear

285



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

mappings such that v = lim v a . We note on the other hand that for a ^ p the

mapping

Hom(l F ,/ a3 ) = / a3 :Hom A (F, E 3 ) -&gt;Hom A (F, E a )

is a Z-module homomorphism such that (Hom A (F, E a ),^ 3 ) is an inverse
system of Z-modules; as j^ te (&amp; (J ) = f^ ° v &amp; , the above remarks can therefore be
expressed as follows :

Proposition 2. For every inverse system (E a , j^ 3 ) of A-modules and every A-module
F, the canonical mapping u ►-&gt; (y^ ou) is a Z-module isomorphism

(2) / F : Hom A (F, Hm E a ) -&gt; Hm Hom A (F, E a ) .

Corollary. For every A-module homomorphism v:F -&gt; F', the

u a = Hom( y , l Ea ) : Hom(F', E a ) -&gt; Hom(F, E a )
form an inverse system of Z-linear mappings and the diagram

Ffom(F', lim E a ) -^-&gt; lim Hom(F', E a )



(3) Hom(o, 1 E )



limc a



Hom(F, lim E a ) — — &gt;■ Hm Hom(F, E a )
is commutative.

For all u e Hom(F', lim E a ), l F (u o v) = (/« ° " ° &amp; ) by definition and the
commutativity of diagram (3) follows immediately from the definitions.

2. DIRECT LIMITS OF MODULES

Henceforth I is assumed to be right directed.

Let (A a , (j&gt; 3a ) be a direct system of rings (I, § 10, no. 3), (E a ,/ 3oe ) a direct
system of commutative groups (written additively) (I, § 10, no. 3) and sup-
pose that each E a has a left A^-module structure; further, suppose that, for
a ^ P&gt; (/ea) ^Ba) ]S a dimorphism of E a into E 3 (§1, no. 13), in other words
that

(4) /0«(\x*«) = &lt;M X a)/p«(*a)

for x a e E a , X a e A a ; then E = lim E a has a left module structure over A = lim A a

(I, § 10, no. 4). For all a £ I, let/ a :E a -&gt;E, &lt;j&gt; a :A a -^A be the canonical
mappings; then (f a , &lt;{&gt;„) is a dimorphism of E a into E. We shall say that
(Eojjj^a) is a direct system of left A^-modules and that the A-module E is its
direct limit.

Let (E«,/ 3a ) be another direct system of left A a -modules and, for all a,

286



DIRECT LIMITS OF MODULES § 6.2

let « a :Ea-&gt;E a be an A^-linear mapping, these mappings forming a direct
system; then u = lim u a is an A-linear mapping of lim E£ into lim E a .

Moreover:

Proposition 3. Let (E a ,/ Ba ), (E' a ,f£ n ), (E£,/p a ) be three direct systems of A a -
modules and (u a ), (v a ) two direct systems of ' A^-linear mappings such that the sequences

K -^ E a -*&gt; K

are exact for all a. Then, writing u = lim u a , v = lim v a , the sequence

lim E; -^» lim E a -^» lim E£

is exact.

«(lim E£) = lim« a (E;) and zr^O) = lim v^(0) (Set Theory, III, § 7, no. 6,

Corollary to Proposition 7).

Loosely speaking, Proposition 3 can also be expressed by saying that passing
to the direct limit preserves exactness.

Proposition 4. Let (E a ,/ 3cc ) be a direct system of A^-modules, E = lim E a its
direct limit and ^^-.A^— &gt;A and f a :TL a -&gt; TL the canonical mappings for all a £ I.
If, for all a e I, S a is a generating system ofE a , then S = U f a (S a ) is a generating
system ofE.

Every x e E is of the form^^) for some a e I and some x a e E a and by
hypothesis x = 2 X^ , where ^eA, and y™ e S a ; writing X (i) = §*(&gt;$),

y w =My«), we obtain x = 2 X (i ty (i) .

Proposition 5. With the hypotheses and notation of Proposition 4, suppose that for
all a 6 1, E a is the direct sum of a family (M£) aeL of submodules (the indexing set L
being independent of a.) and thatf &amp;(X (M^) c= M^for a ^ p and for all X e L. Then
E is the direct sum of the submodules M&gt; = lim M„ (X e L).

a

It follows from Proposition 4 that E is the sum of the M\ Let (y K )^. eLl be a
family such that y x e M x for all X e L and whose support is finite and suppose

that 2L,y K = 0. By virtue of Set Theory, III, § 7, no. 5, Lemma 1, there exist
an a 6 I and a family (x£) aeIj of finite support consisting of elements of E a

such that *£ e M£ and y K = /«(*£) for all X e L. The relation fJ 2 *«) =
implies the existence of a (3 $s a such that / B J .2, #£ j = (6W Theory, III,

287



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

§ 7, no. 5, Lemma 1), which may be written as 2., x\ = 0, where

x\ =/3a(*a) eMjj by hypothesis; hence x$ = for all XeL and therefore
y x =fp(x$) = for all XeL, which proves that the sum of the M&gt; is direct.

Corollary. Let (P a ) be a direct system of subsets of E a and let P = lim P a . If

for all a £ I, P a is a free subset (resp. basis) of E a , then P is a free subset (resp.
basis) ofE.

The second assertion follows immediately from the first and Proposition 4.
It is therefore sufficient to prove that if the P a are free every subset
{y ii) }i&lt;i&lt;n consisting of distinct elements of P, is free. There exists an a e I
and elements *« f&gt; e P a such that y (i) =/ a (4°) for 1 &lt; * ^ » (Set Theory, III,

§ 7, no. 5, Lemma 1); if 2 X ( V° = 0, it may be assumed that X (0 = ^(X*?)

for 1 ^ i &lt; n and hence/ a Q, XJ, *^) = 0; this implies 2, XJ, *!, = for some

P ^ a, where 7$ = ^(X^ ), xf =/ Ba (*'a &lt;) ) and the xf belong to P and are
distinct since y m = f${xf); then \f = for 1 &lt; t &lt; n, whence

X&lt;» = &lt;j&gt; (xg&gt;) =
for 1 &lt; z' &lt; n.

Suppose now that all the rings A a are equal to the same ring A and the
&lt;!&gt;0(x to IaJ m en, for every direct system (E a ,/ Ba ) of A-modules, E = lim E a
is an A-module. Let F be an A-module and for all a let u a : E a -&gt;- F be an
A-linear mapping such that (« a ) is a direct system of mappings; then
u = lim u a is an A-linear mapping of E into F. Conversely, for every A-linear

mapping a: lim E a -&gt; F, the family of v a = v o/ a is a direct system of A-linear
mappings such that v = lim z&gt; a . On the other hand we note that for a ^ p
the mapping

Hom(/ Ba , 1 P ) =/ a3 :Hom A (E 3 , F) -* Hom A (E a , F)

is a Z-module homomorphism such that (Hom A (E a , F),^ B ) is an inverse
system ofZ-modules; asf a&amp; (v &amp; ) = v a o/ BceJ the above remarks can be expressed
as follows :

Proposition 6. For every direct system (E^f^) of A-modules and every A-module
F, the canonical mapping ft i-&gt; (u of a ) is a Z.-module isomorphism

(5) d F : Hom A (lim E a , F) -&gt; lim Hom A (E a , F) .

Corollary 1. For every A-module homomorphism v:F -&gt; F', the
v a = Hom(l Ea&gt; v) :Hom(E a , F) -&gt; Hom(E a , F)

288



TENSOR PRODUCT OF DIRECT LIMITS § 6.3

form an inverse system ofTAinear mappings and the diagram

Hom(lim E a , F) — !-► lim Hom(E a , F)



(6) Hom(l B ,r)



lim!



Hom(lim E a , F') —^ lim Hom(E a , F')

is commutative.

For all u e Horn (lim E a , F), d F ,(vou) = (jo«o/ a ) by definition and the
commutativity of diagram (6) then follows immediately from the definitions.

Corollary 2. If (E a ,/ Pa ) is a direct system of left A-modules and E = lim E a ,
(E*, J/" 3a ) is an inverse system of right A-modules and lim E* is canonically isomorphic
toE*.

Remark. Let E be an A-module and (M a ) aeI an increasing family of sub-
modules of E such that E is the union of the M a ; if j &amp;a : M a — &gt; M 3 (for a &lt; p)
and,/ a : M a — &gt; E are the canonical injections, it is immediate that j = limja

is an isomorphism of lim M onto E (Set Theory, III, § 7, no. 6, Remark 1).

In particular, every A-module is the direct limit of the right directed family
of its finitely generated submodules.

3. TENSOR PRODUCT OF DIRECT LIMITS

Let (A a , p 3a ) be a direct system of rings and (E a ,/ 3(X ) (resp. (F a ,£ 3oc )) be a
direct system of right (resp. left) Aa-modules. For a ^ $, there is a Z-module
homomorphism

/s« ® g»A (S&gt;a« F a -&gt; (E p ) [Aal 0^ (F 3 ) IAoJ

and on the other hand there is a canonical Z-module homomorphism

(Eb)[a«] ®a„ (F B ) [Aa] -&gt; E 3 Ap F e

corresponding to the ring homomorphism p 3a (§ 3, no. 3, Proposition 2);
whence by composition we obtain a Z-module homomorphism

V : E « &lt;8&gt;A a F a -&gt; E 3 ® Ap F 3

which maps the tensor product x a ®y a to/ 3a (^ a ) ® ^p a (y a ). Clearly

(E«®A«F a ,Afl a )

is a t/z'rert system of Z-modules. Let A = lim A a , E = lim E a , F = lim F a and

289



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

let p a :A a -&gt; A, j^:E a -&gt; E, £ a :F a -&gt; F be the canonical mappings. As above,
a Z-linear mapping 7r a : E a ® Aa F a -&gt; E ® A F is defined, which maps the
tensor product x a ®y a to / a (x a ) &lt;g&gt;g a (y&lt;x)&gt; an d it is immediate that these
mappings form a direct system. Thus we obtain a Z-linear mapping

(7) 7r = lim Tvlim (E a ® Aa F a ) -&gt; E ® A F.

Proposition 7. The "L-linear mapping (7) is bijective.

We set P = lim(E a &lt;g&gt; Aa F a ) and, for all a £ I, let A a :E a ® Aa F a -*» P be
the canonical mapping. On the other hand, for all a g I, let

* a :E a x F a -^E a ® Aa F a

be the canonical Z-bilinear mapping; for a ^ (3,

and hence (£ a ) is a direct system of mappings. Canonically identifying
lim(E a x F a ) with E x F (Set Theory, III, § 7, no. 7, Proposition 10), we

derive a mapping t = lim t^-.E x F -&gt; P such that

t(fM,g«(y«)) = *a('a(*e»ya)) = Ax(*a®ifa)-

Taking account of ^ Theory, III, § 7, no. 5, Lemma 1, it is immediately
seen that / is Z-bilinear; moreover, for x e E, y g F, X g A, there exists a g I
such that * =/ a (* a ), y = £«(#«), X = Pa (X a ) with X a GA a , « a eE w y«eF a
(&amp;f Theory, III, § 3, no. 7, Lemma 1) ; whence

t(x\,y) = A«((x a X a ) &lt;S&gt;# a ) = ^a(^« ® (^ a y«)) = t{*&gt; ty)-

Hence there exists one and only one Z-linear mapping n' : E &lt;g) A F -&gt;■ P such
that 7c'(#(8&gt;y) = t(x,y) (§3, no. 1, Proposition 1). Moreover, by defini-
tion

Tz'(Tz(h a (x a ®y a ))) = w'(/a(*a) ® &amp;(?«)) = ^a(*a ® #«)

nfr'ifM ®&amp;(y«))) = *(*«(*« ®y«)) =/«(*«) &lt;8&gt; &amp;*(#«)

and as the elements of the formy^(# a ) ® ga(y a ) (resp. A a (x a &lt;g) y a )) generate
the Z-module E ® A F (resp. P), n' o tt and 7c o tc' are the identity mappings.

Loosely speaking, Proposition 7 may be expressed by saying that tensor
products commute with direct limits and usually the two sides of (7) are identified
by means of the isomorphism tz.

Corollary 1. Let (E^,/^) (resp. (F«, g^)) be another direct system of right
(resp. left) A a -modules; for all a g I, let M a :E a -&gt;Ea (resp. z&gt; a :F a -&gt;F£) be an

290



TENSOR PRODUCT OF DIRECT LIMITS § 6.3

Aa-linear mapping such that (w a ) (resp. (z&gt; a )) is a direct system. Then (M a ©» a ) is a.
direct system ofL-linear mappings and the diagram

lim(E a ® Aa F a ) ► (limE a ) ® A (limF a )



(8) ^("a ® »&lt;x)



(Iim u a ) ® (lim » a )



lim(E;® Aa F;) &gt; (limE;) ® A (limF;)

is commutative.
The verification is immediate.

Let (A£, pB a ) be another direct system of rings and suppose that each E a
is an (A;, A a )-bimodule, the / Ba being (A£, A.) -linear for a ^ p. Then if
we write A' = lim A4, the isomorphism (7) is linear with respect to the left
A'-module structures on the two sides by virtue of Corollary 1 . This can be
immediately generalized to arbitrary multimodules.

In particular, if the A a are commutative, A = lim A^ is commutative and
isomorphism (7) is an A-module isomorphism.

Corollary 2. Let (E a ,/ 3a ) be a direct system of right A^-modules and let
E« = E a ® Aa A be the A-module obtained by extending the ring of scalars to
A = lim A M by means of the canonical homomorphism p a :A a -&gt;A. Then

(E«,/ a &lt;g&gt; 1 A ) is a direct system of right A-modules, whose direct limit is canonically
isomorphic to lim E a .

It suffices to apply Proposition 7 with F a the ring A considered as an
(A a , A)-bimodule by means of p a .

Corollary 3. Let A be a ring, (E a ,/ 3a ) a direct system of right A-modules and F
a left A-module. Then the Z-modules lim (E a ® A F) and (lim E a ) &lt;g) A F are canonic-
ally isomorphic.

It suffices to take A a = A and F a = F for all a e I in Proposition 7.
In particular, if p:A-&gt;B is a ring homomorphism, limp*(E a ) and
p*(lim E a ) are canonically isomorphic. *"

Corollary 4. Let M be a right A-module, N a left A-module, (*0i &lt;i&lt;n a family
of elements ofM, (yi) 1&lt;i&lt;n a family of elements ofN, such that Z, (x t 0y t ) =0 in
M &lt;g) A N. Then there exists a finitely generated submodule M x (resp. N x ) ofM (resp.
N) containing the x { (resp. the y t ) and such that 2* (x t ® y^) =0 in M x ® A N x .

M (resp. N) is canonically identified with the direct limit of the right direc-
ted family of its finitely generated submodules containing the x t (resp. the y t )
and it suffices to apply Set Theory, III, § 7, no. 5, Lemma 1.

291



II LINEAR ALGEBRA



§ 7. VECTOR SPACES

1. BASES OF A VECTOR SPACE

Theorem 1. Every vector space over afield K is a free YL-module.

It must be proved that every vector space admits a basis', this will follow
from the following more precise theorem :

Theorem 2. Given a generating system S of a vector space E over afield K and a
free subset Lo/E contained in S, there exists a basis BofE such that L c B c S.

Theorem 1 follows from this statement by taking L = .

To prove Theorem 2, we note that the set £ of free subsets of E contained
in S, ordered by inclusion, is an inductive set (Set Theory, III, § 2, no. 4), by
virtue of § 1, no. 11 ; so is the set 9K of free subsets containing L and con-
tained in S. By Zorn's Lemma, 2ft admits a maximal element B and it suffices
to prove that the vector subspace of E generated by B is equal to E. This
follows immediately from the definition of B and the following lemma:

Lemma 1. Let (ajiei be a free family of elements of E; ifb e E does not belong to the
subspace F generated by (a t ), the subset qfE consisting of the a l and b is free.

Suppose that there were a relation \xb + 2* \a v = with (ieK and
\ e K for all t e I, the family (X t ) having finite support; if [x # 0, it would
follow that b — —2, (y.~ 1 \)a l and hence b eF contrary to the hypothesis;

hence [i = and the relation becomes 2* \a K = 0, which implies \ =
for all i £ I by hypothesis; whence the lemma.

Corollary. For a subset B of a vector space E, the following properties are equiva-
lent:

(a) B is a basis ofE.

(b) B is a maximal free subset qfY,.

(c) B is a minimal generating system ofTL.
This follows immediately from Theorem 2.

Example. Given a ring A and a subfield K of A, A is a (right or left) vector
space over K and therefore admits a basis; in particular, every extension
field of a field K has a basis as a left (resp. right) vector space over K.
*Thus the field R of real numbers admits an (infinite) basis as a vector
space over the field Q, of rational numbers; such a basis of R is called a
Hamel basis. *

292



DIMENSION OF VECTOR SPACES § 7.2

Remark. For a family (fli) t6 i of elements of a vector space E over a field K
to be free, it is necessary and sufficient that, for all K e I, a K belong to no
subspace of E generated by the a t of index i ^ k. We know that this con-
dition is necessary in any module (§ 1, no. 11, Remark 1). It is sufficient by
virtue of Lemma 1, as is seen immediately arguing by reductio ad absurdum
and considering a minimal related subfamily of (a t ).

2. DIMENSION OF VECTOR SPACES

Theorem 3. Two bases of the same vector space E over afield K are equipotent.

We note first that if E admits an infinite basis B, it follows from § 1,
no. 12, Corollary 2 to Proposition 23 that every other basis of E is equipotent
to B. We may therefore confine our attention to the case where E has a finite
basis of n elements. We note that every monogenous vector space over K, not
reduced to 0, is a simple K-module (I, § 4, no. 4, Definition 7), for it is gener-
ated by each of its elements ^0, by virtue of the relation y.a = (u.X)(X -1 a)

n

for (x e K, X e K and X ^ 0. Hence if (a^ &lt;i&lt;n is a basis of E, then E = Kp Ka 4

K

up to isomorphism and the subspaces E fc = vt9 Ka, for ^ k ^ n form a

Jordan-Holder series of E, E fc /E fc _ x being isomorphic to Ka fc . Theorem 3 then
follows in this case from the Jordan-Holder Theorem (I, § 4, no. 7, Theorem

6).

A proof can be given independent of the Jordan-Holder Theorem, by
showing by induction on n that, if E admits a basis of n elements, every
other basis B' has at most n elements. The proposition is obvious for n = 0.
If n ^ 1, B' is non-empty; then let a e B'. By Theorem 2 (no. 1) there exists
a subset G of B such that {a} uCisa basis of E and a ^ C, since {a} KJ B is
obviously a generating system of E. As B is a basis of E, G = B is impossible
(no. 1, Corollary to Theorem 2) and hence C has at most n — 1 elements.
Let V be the subspace generated by G and V the subspace generated by
B' — {a}; V and V are both supplementary to the subspace Ka of E and
hence are isomorphic (§ 1, no. 10, Proposition 13). As V admits a basis with
at most n — 1 elements, B' — {a} has at most n — 1 elements by the induc-
tion hypothesis and hence B' has at most n elements.

Definition 1. The dimension of a vector space E over afield K, denoted by dim K E
or [E:K] {or simply dim E) is the cardinal of any of the bases qfE.IfM.isa subset
of E, the rank of M (over K), denoted by rg M or rg K M, is the dimension of the
vector subspace ofTL generated by M.

To say that E is finite-dimensional is equivalent to saying that E is a K-
module of finite length and dim K E = long K E.

293



LINEAR ALGEBRA



Corollary. For every subset M»/E, the rank of M is at most equal to dim E.

If V is the vector subspace of E generated by M, M contains a basis B'
of V (no. 1, Theorem 2) and as B' is a free subset of E, it is contained in a basis
B of E (no. 1, Theorem 2); then Card(B') &lt; Card(B), whence the corollary.

Theorems 2 and 3 immediately imply the following proposition :

Proposition 1. (i) For a left vector space over K to be of finite dimension n, it is
necessary and sufficient that it be isomorphic to K* .

(ii) For two vector spaces K™ and K" to be isomorphic (m and n integers ^0), it
is necessary and sufficient that m = n.

(iii) In a vector space E of finite dimension n, every generating system has at least
n elements; a generating system o/"E with n elements is a basis ofE.

(iv) In a vector space E of finite dimension n, every free subset has at most n elements;
a free subset with n elements is a basis of E.

Proposition 2. Let (E t )i 6l be a family of vector spaces over K. Then

(1) dim K (© E t ) = 2 dim K E t .

If the E t are canonically identified with subspaces of E = © E and B t
is a basis of E t (i e I), then B = U B t is a basis of E (§ 1, no. 11, Proposition
19) ; whence relation (1) since the B t are pairwise disjoint.

Remark. (1) Examples can be given of modules admitting two finite bases
not having the same number of elements (§ 1, Exercise 16(c)). How-
ever:

Proposition 3. Let A be a ring such that there exists a homomorphism p of A
into afield D; then for every free A-module E, any two bases ofE are equipotent.

Consider the vector space p*(E) = D ® A E over D obtained by extending
the ring of scalars to D (§ 5, no. 1) and let fm 1 &lt;g&gt; x be the canonical
mapping of E into p*(E); if K,) is a basis of E, (&lt;|&gt;(«x)) is a basis of P*( E )
(§ 5, no. 1, Proposition 4) ; the proposition then follows from Theorem 3.

Corollary. If A is a commutative ring #0 and E a free A-module, any two bases
of E are equipotent.

There exists in A at least one maximal ideal m (I, § 8, no. 6, Theorem 1)
and, as A/m is a field, the conditions of Proposition 3 are fulfilled.

Remarks. (2) When a free A-module E is such that any two bases of E are
equipotent, the cardinal of an arbitrary basis of E over A is also called the
dimension or rank of E and denoted by dim A E or dim E.

294



DIMENSION AND CODIMENSION OF A SUBSPACE OF A VECTOR SPACE § 7.3

(3) Let A be a ring such that any two bases of a free A-module are equi-
potent and let K be a subfield of A, so that A can be considered as a left
vector space over K by restricting the scalars. Every free A-module E can simi-
larly be considered as a left vector space over K and it then follows from
§ 1, no. 13, Proposition 25 that

(2) dim K E = dim K E . dim K A s .

(4) In Chapter VIII we shall see examples of rings satisfying the con-
clusion of Proposition 3 but not the hypothesis.

3. DIMENSION AND CODIMENSION OF A SUBSPACE OF A VECTOR SPACE

Proposition 4. Every subspace E of a vector space E is a direct factor ofE and

(3) dim F + dim(E/F) = dim E.

As the quotient vector space E/F is a free module, we know (§ 1, no. 1 1, Pro-
position 21) that F is a direct factor of E; relation (3) is then a special case of
formula (1) (no. 2).

Corollary 1. IfE, F, G are vector spaces over afield K, every exact sequence of
linear mappings 0-&gt;E-&gt;F-»G-^-0 splits.

This is another way of expressing Proposition 4 (§ 1, no. 9).

Corollary 2. Let (E i ) 0&lt; i&lt;» be a finite family of vector spaces over afield K. If
there exists an exact sequence of linear mappings

(4) — &gt; E — -&gt; E x — &gt; E 2 &gt; • • • — &gt; E n _i — &gt; E n &gt;

the relation

(5) 2fc 2 &lt;n dimE 2fc + 1 = 2 n dimE 2fc
holds, or, if all the spaces are finite dimensional,

n

(6) 2 (-i)*dimE t = 0.

Let I fc = Im u k = Kerw fc + 1 for &lt; A; &lt; n — 1; I fc + 1 is therefore iso-
morphic to E fc + 1 /I fc , hence (formula (3)) dim I fc + dim I fc + 1 = dim E fc + 1 for
^ k ^ n — 2 and moreover dim I = dim E and I n _i = E n , hence
dim I n _i = dim E n . Replacing dim E, by its expression as a function of the

n-l

dim I fc in the two sides of (5), we obtain on each side Z, dim I fc , whence
the corollary.

295



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Corollary 3. IfM and N are two subspaces of a vector space E, then
(7) dim(M + N) + dim(M nN) = dim M + dim N.

It suffices to apply Corollary 2 to the exact sequence

0-^MnN-&gt;M©N-&gt;M + N-&gt;0
(§ 1, no. 8, Proposition 10) taking account of the fact that

dim(M © N) = dim M + dim N
(no. 2, Proposition 2).

Corollary 4. For every subspace F of a vector space E, dim F ^ dim E; if E
is finite dimensional, the relation dim F == dim E is equivalent toF = E.

The first assertion is obvious from (3) ; further, if dim E is finite, the rela-
tion dim F = dim E implies dim(E/F) = by (3) and a vector space of
dimension reduces to 0.

Corollary 5. If a vector space E is the sum of a family (F t ) of vector subspaces,
then



(8) dim E ^ 2



dim F t .



If further dim E is finite, the two sides of (8) are equal if and only ifE is the direct
sum of the family (F t ).

The inequality (8) follows from (3) and the fact that E is isomorphic to a

quotient of © F, (§ 1, no. 7, formula (28)). The second assertion is a particular

case of § 1, no. 10, Corollary 5 to Proposition 16, for the equality of the two
sides of (8) implies that dim F t = except for a finite number of indices.

Definition 2. Given a vector space E, the codimension (with respect to E) of a sub-
space Fo/E, denoted by codim E F, or simply codim F, is the dimension of E/F
(equal to that of any supplement of F in E).

Relation (3) may then be written

(9) dim F + codim F = dim E.

Proposition 5. Let F, F' be two subspaces of a vector space E, such that F &lt;= F\
Then codim E F' &lt; codim E F &lt; dim E. If codim B F is finite, the relation
codim E F' = codim B F implies F = F'.

The inequality codim E F ^ dim E is obvious from (9) and if dim E is
296



DIMENSION AND CODIMENSION OF A SUBSPACE OF A VECTOR SPACE § 7.3

finite the relation codim E F = dim E implies dim F = and hence F = {0}.
The remainder of the proposition follows from this, for

codim E F' = codim E/F (F'/F),
since E/F' is canonically isomorphic to (E/F)/(F'/F) (I, § 4, no. 7, Theorem 4).
Proposition 6.I/M and N are two subspaces of a vector space E, then
(10) codim(M + N) + codim(M nN)= codimM + codimN.
It suffices to apply Corollary 2 of Proposition 4 to the exact sequence
-» E/(M nN)^ (E/M) (E/N) -&gt; E/(M + N) -&gt;
(§ 1, no. 7, Proposition 10) and use no. 2, Proposition 2.

Note that if E is finite dimensional, (10) is a consequence of (7) and (9).

Proposition 7. If (F { ) is a finite family of subspaces of a vector space E, then

codim[M F t J &lt; 2-, codim F 4 .

If F = (l F„ E/F is isomorphic to a subspace of the direct sum of the
E/F, (§ 1, no. 7, formula (27)).

Vector subspaces of dimension 1 (resp. dimension 2) of a vector space E
are often called lines passing through (resp. planes passing through 0) (or simply
lines (resp. planes) if no confusion arises (cf. §9, no. 3)), by analogy with
the language of Classical Geometry; a subspace of E is called a hyperplane
passing through (or simply a hyperplane) if it is of codimension 1 . Hyperplanes
can also be defined as the maximal elements of the set &lt;S of vector subspaces
of E distinct from E, ordered by inclusion. There is a one-to-one correspond-
ence between the subspaces of E containing a subspace H and the subspaces
of E/H (I, § 4, no. 7, Theorem 4) ; if E is of dimension ^ 1, &lt;S is non-empty
and to say that H is maximal in @ means that E/H contains no subspace
distinct from {0} and E/H, which implies that E/H is generated by any of
its elements #0, in other words it is of dimension 1.

In a vector space of finite dimension n ^ 1, the hyperplanes are the sub-
spaces of dimension n — 1 by formula (3).

Proposition 8. In a vector space E over a field K, every vector subspace F is the
intersection of the hyperplanes which contain it.

It suffices to show that for all x $ F there exists a hyperplane H containing
F and not containing x. By hypothesis F n K* = {0} and hence the sum M
of F and K# is direct. Let N be supplementary to M in E; E is then the direct
sum of H = F + N and Kx and H is therefore a hyperplane with the desired
property.

297



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Remark. Most of the properties proved in this no. for subspaces of a vector
space do not hold for submodules of a free module whose dimension (§ 2, no.
7, Remark 2) is defined. *For example, an ideal of a commutative ring does
not necessarily admit a basis, for there are integral domains A in which cer-
tain ideals are not principal (VII, § 1, no. 1) and any two elements of such a
ring are linearly dependent (§ 1, no. 11, Remark 1).* A submodule of a free
A-module E may be free, distinct from E and have the same dimension as
E, as is shown by principal ideals in an integral domain A; the same example
proves moreover that a free submodule of a free A-module does not neces-
sarily admit a supplement.

4. RANK OF A LINEAR MAPPING

Definition 3. Let E, F be two vector spaces over afield K. For every linear mapping
uo/E into F, the dimension of the subspace w(E) ofF is called the rank ofu and denoted
byrg{u).

If N = Ker(w), E/N is isomorphic to u(E), whence the relation

(11) r g(") = codim E (Ker(tt))
and therefore

(12) rg(u) + dim(Ker(u) = dim E.
Moreover, by formula (3)

(13) rg(w) + dim(Coker(u)) = dimF.

Proposition 9. Let E, F be two vector spaces over afield K and u:E -&gt; F a linear
mapping.

(i) rg(u) ^ inf(dim E, dim F).

(ii) Suppose that E is finite-dimensional; in order that rg(tt) = dim E, it is
necessary and sufficient that u be infective.

(iii) Suppose that F is finite-dimensional; in order that rg(w) = dim F, it is
necessary and sufficient that u be surjective.

This follows immediately from relations (12) and (13).

Corollary. Let E be a vector space of finite dimension n and u an endomorphism
ofE. The following properties are equivalent:

(a) u is bijective;

(b) u is injective;

(c) u is surjective;

(d) u is right invertible;

(e) u is left invertible;

(f) u is of rank n.

298



DUAL OF A VECTOR SPACE § 7.5

If E is an infinite-dimensional vector space, there are infective (resp.
surjective) endomorphisms of E which are not bijective (Exercise 9).

Let K, K' be two fields, or:K -&gt; K' an isomorphism of K onto K', E a vector
K-space, E' a vector K'-space and u : K -» K' a semi-linear mapping relative
to &lt;t (§ 1, no. 13); the dimension of the subspace m(E) of E' is also called the
rank of u. It is also the rank of u considered as a linear mapping of E into ct*(E'),
for every basis of «(E) is also a basis of &lt;j#(m(E)).

5. DUAL OF A VECTOR SPACE

Theorem 4. The dimension of the dual E* of a vector space E is at least equal to
the dimension of E. For E* to be finite-dimensional, it is necessary and sufficient that
E be so, and then dim E* = dim E.

If K is the field of scalars of E, E is isomorphic to a space Kj I} and therefore
E* is isomorphic to K^ (§2, no. 6, Proposition 10). As K^ is a subspace
of Kd, dim E = Card (I) &lt; dim E* (no. 3, Corollary 4 to Proposition 4) ;
further, if I is finite, Kjj = K^ (cf. Exercise 3(d)).

Corollary. For a vector space E, the relations E = {0} and E* = {0} are equiva-
lent.

Theorem 5. Given two exact sequences of vector spaces (over the same field K) and
linear mappings

0^E'-&gt;E-&gt;E"-^0

0-&gt;F'^F-&gt;F"-&gt;0

and two vector spaces G, H over K, the corresponding sequences

-&gt; Hom(E", G) -» Hom(E, G) -&gt; Hom(E', G) -&gt;
-&gt; Hom(H, F') -» Hom(H, F) -&gt; Hom(H, F") -&gt;

are exact and split.

This follows from the fact that every vector subspace is a direct factor
(no. 3, Proposition 4) and from § 2, no. 1, Propositions 1 and 2.

Corollary. For every exact sequence

— &gt; E' -!U E -U E* — &gt;
of vector spaces over the same field K and linear mappings the sequence

— &gt; E w * -X E* -X E'* — &gt;
is exact and splits.

299



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

It follows in particular that for every vector subspace M of E the canonical
homomorphism E*/M' -&gt; M*, where M' is the subspace of E* orthogonal
to M (§ 2, no. 4), is bijective.

Theorem 6. For every vector space E over a field K, the canonical mapping
c B :E-&gt;E** (§2, no. 7) is infective; for it to be bijective, it is necessary and
sufficient that E be finite-dimensional.

The first assertion and the fact that if E is finite-dimensional c E is bijective
are special cases of § 2, no. 7, Proposition 14. Suppose that E is infinite-dimen-
sional, so that we may assume that E = K&lt; L) , where L is an infinite set and
therefore E* = K£. Let (e K ) Kell be the canonical basis of E and let {ef) Xeh be
the corresponding family of coordinate forms in E* (§ 2, no. 6) ; the vector sub-
space of E* generated by the ef is just the direct sum F' = K ( d L) and the hypo-
thesis that L is infinite implies that F' ^ E*. Then there exists a hyperplane H'
of E* containing F' (no. 3, Proposition 8) and, as E*/H' is non-zero, its dual is
also non-zero (Corollary to Theorem 4), which is identified with the orthogonal
FT of H' in E** (§ 2, no. 6, Corollary to Proposition 9). But FT n c E (E) is
contained in the image under c E of the orthogonal of F' in E, which is by de-
finition 0; hence c B (E) = E** is impossible.

E will usually be identified with the subspace of E** the image of c E .
Let E, F be two vector spaces over a field K and «:E-&gt;Fa linear mapping.
We shall define canonical isomorphisms:

(1) Of the dual qflm{u) = w(E) onto Im( f w) = «n(F*).

(2) Of the dual ofKer(u) = ~u(0) onto Coker('w) = E*/ f «(F*).

(3) Of the dual o/Coker(u) = F/u(E) onto Ker('u) = 'u'^O).

We write I = Im(«), N = Ker(ii), C = Coker(w) ; from the exact sequences

(14) o — &gt; N — &gt; E -^-&gt; I — &gt; 0, — &gt; I -U F — &gt; C — &gt;
we derive, by transposition (Corollary to Theorem 5), the exact sequences



(15)



— &gt; I* _L&gt; E* — &gt; N* — &gt; 0,
— &gt; C* — &gt; F* — '-&gt; I* — &gt; 0.



Moreover, as u =j°p, l u = l p ° t j; the exact sequences (15) thus define
canonical isomorphisms of C* onto Ker('w), of I* onto Im('w) and of N* onto
CokerCtt), since *p is injective and *j surjective. To be precise, let y e Im(«),
zeKer(tt), *eCoker(w), y' c Im('w), z' e Coker(' M ), i'eKerfa); when y',
z', t' are canonically identified with linear forms on Im(«), Ker(w) and
Coker(w) respectively, then
(16) &lt;y&gt; y'y = &lt;*, y'&gt; for all x e E such that u(x) = y ;

300



DUAL OF A VECTOR SPACE § 7.5

(17) &lt;z, z'&gt; = &lt;z, **&gt; for all x* e E* whose class mod. 'm(F) is equal to

z'l

(18) (t, t'y = (s, t'y for all s e F whose class mod. u(E) is equal to t.

In particular we derive from these results:

Proposition 10. Let E, F be two vector spaces over the same field K and m:E -&gt;■ F
a linear mapping.

(i) For u to be injective (resp. surjective), it is necessary and sufficient that '« be
surjective (resp. injective).

(ii) rg(w) &lt; rg('w) andrg(u) = rg^w) ifrg(u) is finite.

The second assertion follows from the above and Theorem 4.

Theorem 7. Let F be a vector space over a field K, F a subspace of E and F' the
orthogonal ofF in E*.

(i) dim F' ^ codim B F;for dim F' /o be finite, it is necessary and sufficient that
codim E F be finite, and then dim F' = codim B F.

(ii) The orthogonal qfF' in E is equal to F.

(iii) Every finite-dimensional subspace G' o/*E* is the orthogonal of some subspace
ofFj, necessarily equal to the orthogonal ofG' in E and of finite codimension.

(i) We know that F' is isomorphic to the dual (E/F) * (§ 2, no. 6, Corollary
to Proposition 9) and hence the assertion follows from Theorem 4, since
dim (E/F) = codim E F by definition.

(ii) Let F x be the orthogonal of F' in E ; clearly F &lt;= F x and the ortho-
gonal F' x of F x is equal to F' (§ 2, no. 4) ; the canonical linear mapping
(E/F x )* -&gt; (E/F)*, the transpose of E/F -» E/Fj is therefore bijective (§ 2, no.
6, Corollary to Proposition 10); it then follows from Proposition 10 that the
canonical mapping E/F -&gt; E/F x is bijective, which implies F x = F.

(iii) Let G' be a subspace of E* of finite dimension/* and let F be its ortho-
gonal in E; then codim E F &lt; dim G'. For, if (af)i&lt; l! gp is a basis of G', F is
the kernel of the linear mapping x ■-&gt; «#, a*» from E to Kf whose rank is at
most/&gt; (no. 4, Proposition 9), whence the conclusion (no. 4). Then let F' be the
orthogonal of F in E*; it follows from (i) that dim F' &lt; dim G'; but on the
other hand obviously G' c: F', whence F' = G' (§ 2, no. 3, Corollary 4 to Pro-
position 4).

Remark. An infinite-dimensional subspace G' of E* is not necessarily the
orthogonal of a subspace of E, in other words, if F is the orthogonal of G' in
E, the orthogonal F' of F in E* may be distinct from G' (Exercise 20(b)). f



f By giving E and E* suitable topologies and only considering in E and E*
subspaces closed with respect to these topologies, it is possible to re-establish a
perfect symmetry between the properties of E and E* when E is infinite-dimen-
sional (cf. Topological vector spates, II, § 6).

301



LINEAR ALGEBRA



Corollary 1. Let (xf) 1&lt;i ^ p be a finite sequence of linear forms on E and let F
be the subspace ofE consisting of the x such that

&lt;x, xf) = for 1 ^ i &lt; p.

Then codim E F is equal to the rank of the set of the xf and every linear form on E
which is zero on F is a linear combination of the xf. Then codim E F ^ p and in
order that codim E F = p, it is necessary and sufficient that the xf be linearly indepen-
dent.

The set G' of linear combinations of the xf is a subspace of E* and F is
the orthogonal of G' in E, hence codim E F = dim G' by Theorem 7 ; further
dim G' &lt; p and the relation dim G' = p means that (xf) is a free system
(no. 2, Proposition 1) ; hence the corollary.

Corollary 2. (i) Let (xf) 1&lt;i&lt;p be a finite sequence of linear forms on E. For
(xf) to be a free system, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist a sequence (x t )x &lt;i&lt;p
of elements ofE such that &lt;# j5 xf} = S w (Kronecker index).

(ii) Let (xi) 1&lt;i&lt;p be a finite sequence of elements ofE. For (x t ) to be a free system,
it is necessary and sufficient that there exist a sequence (xf) 1&lt;i&lt;p of linear forms on E
such that &lt;x l5 #*&gt; = 8 W .

Clearly (ii) follows from (i) by considering E as identified with a subspace
ofE** by means of c E (Theorem 6). Let G' be the subspace ofE* generated
by the xf and F its orthogonal in E; E/F and G' can each be canonically
identified with the dual of the other; if the family (xf) is free, there is in E/F
a basis (*,) the dual of (xf) and every representative system (x t ) of the classes
Xi has the required properties. Conversely, the existence of the system (x { )
such that &lt;*„ xf} = S iy implies that for all i the subspace of E* orthogonal
to K.^ contains the xf of index J ^ i but does not contain xf, hence the sys-
tem (xf) 1&lt;i&lt;p isfree.

Corollary 3. Let S be a set and V a vector subspace of the right vector K-space
K® of mappings of S into K. In order that dim V ^ p (where p is an integer), it is
necessary and sufficient that there exist p elements s t ofS andp elements f ofV (1 ^ i ^ p)
such thatf t (Sj) = B tj .

The space K^ is canonically identified with the dual of E = K™ and
f(s) = &lt;e s ,f) for seS and/eKf, (*,), 6S being the canonical basis of E.
Corollary 2 then shows that the condition is sufficient. Conversely, suppose
that dim V ^ p, so that there exists a subspace G' of V of dimension p; let
F be the orthogonal of G' in E, so that dim(E/F) = p. It follows from no. 1,
Theorem 2 that there exist/* elements ^eS such that the e Si (1 &lt; i &lt; p) form a
basis of a supplement F of E (applying Theorem 2 (no. 1) to a free subset con-
sisting of a basis ofE and the generating system the union of this free subset and

302



DUAL OF A VECTOR SPACE § 7.5

the canonical basis of E) ; we then take thejfj to be the elements of a basis of G'
dual to the basis of E/F consisting of the classes of the e Sl mod. F.

Corollary 4. Let E be a vector space and M, N two subspaces of E of finite co-
dimension; ifM', N' are the orthogonals ofM and N in E*, the orthogonal ofM n N
in E* is W + N\

As M (resp. N) is the orthogonal ofM' (resp. N') in E (Theorem 7), M n N
is the orthogonal of M' + N' in E and hence M' + N' is the orthogonal of
M n N in E* (Theorem 7 (iii)).

Corollary 5. Let E be a vector space of finite dimension n. For every subspace F
ofEof dimension p, the orthogonal F'ofF in E* is of dimension n — p. For every
subspace G' ofE* of dimension q, the orthogonal GofG'inEis of dimension n — q
and G' is the orthogonal ofGinE*.

Theorem 7 gives another characterization of hyperplanes in E:

Proposition 11. For every hyperplane H in a vector space E, there exists a linear
form x* on E such that H = ^* _1 (0). Given such a form x*,for a linear form x* on E
to satisfy H = ^* _1 (0), it is necessary and sufficient that x* = x*&lt;x., where at. is a
scalar ^0. Conversely, for every linear form x* # on E, the subspace #* _1 (0) is a
hyperplane ofE.

This statement merely expresses Theorem 7 for subspaces ofE of codimen-
sion 1 and subspaces of E* of dimension 1 .

If H is a hyperplane and x* a linear form such that H = a;* _1 (0) 3 the
relation

&lt;*,**&gt; =

which characterizes the elements x e H, is called an equation ofH.

More generally, if (af) is a family of linear forms on E and F denotes the
vector subspace the intersection of the hyperplanes ** -1 (0), the relation "for
all i, &lt;*, **&gt; = 0" characterizes the elements of F; the relations

&lt;*, x*} = for all i

form a system of equations of the subspace F. Theorem 7 (ii) expresses the fact
that every vector subspace ofE can be defined by a system of equations.

Theorem 7 (i) and (ii) proves moreover that a subspace F of finite codimen-
sion p can be defined by a system of p equations

(19) &lt;*, *?&gt; =0, 1 ^i^p,

where the forms xf are linearly independent. Conversely, Corollary 1 to Theorem
7 shows that a subspace F defined by a system of p equations (19) is of co-
dimension &lt;/&gt; and that it is of codimension p if and only if the xf are linearly

303



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

independent; it amounts to the same to say that F cannot be defined by a system
consisting of at most p — \ of the equations (19).

6. LINEAR EQUATIONS IN VECTOR SPACES

Proposition 12. Let E, F be two vector spaces over afield K and w:E -&gt; F a linear
mapping. For the linear equation

(20) u{x) = y

to have at least one solution x e E, it is necessary and sufficient that y be orthogonal
to the kernel of the transpose mapping i u.

The orthogonal of u(E) in F* is t u~ 1 (0) (§ 2, no. 5, Corollary to Proposition 8)
and the orthogonal of t u~ 1 (0) in F is therefore m(E) (no. 5, Theorem 7 (ii)).

We shall obtain a more convenient criterion for systems of scalar linear equa-
tions

(21) &lt;*,*?&gt; = i)i (iel)

where the unknown x takes its values in a vector space E over a field K,
the x* are linear forms on E and the right hand sides 7) t elements of K.

If we consider a basis (a K )^ Bll of E, the system (21) is equivalent to the sys-
tem of equations

(22) 2 ^&lt;A, *?&gt; = &gt;]&gt; (iel)

A € Li

with x = 2-, Z, K a K , the solutions of (22) being of necessity families (£ x ) of
elements of K of finite support.

Definition 4. The dimension of the subspace ofE* generated by the family (#*) is
called the rank of the system (21).

Proposition 13. For the system (21) to be of finite rank r, it is necessary and suffi-
cient that the linear mapping k :# h-* «#, x* » ofE into Kg be of rank r.

If F' is the subspace of E* generated by the xf, the kernel of u is the ortho-
gonal F of F' in E; if F' is of dimension r, F is of codimension r and conversely
(no. 5, Theorem 7) and rg(u) = codim E F (no. 4, formula (11)).

Theorem 8. Let

(21) &lt;*,*?&gt; = Kli (16 I)

be a system of scalar linear equations on a vector space E over afield K. For this system

304



LINEAR EQUATIONS IN VECTOR SPACES § 7.6

to have at least one solution, it is necessary that, for every family (p t ) of scalar s of finite
support such that Z, #f p t = 0, Z, 7) t p t = 0. If the rank of the system (21) is finite,
this condition is also sufficient.

The condition is obviously necessary. It says that, if F' is the subspace of
E* generated by the family (#*), there exists a linear mapping /: F' -&gt; K d
such that /(**) = v]i for all i e I. If F' is of finite dimension r, F' is the ortho-
gonal of a subspace F of E of codimension r (no. 5, Theorem 7) and F' is identi-
fied with the dual of E/F (§ 2, no. 6, Corollary to Proposition 9) ;jTis therefore
an element of the bidual (E/F)**. As E/F is finite-dimensional there exists one
and only one element y e E/F such that /(**) = &lt;y, **&gt; for all x* e F' (no. 5,
Theorem 6). The solutions of (21) are then the x eE whose canonical image in
E/F is y.

Remark. When the rank of the system (21) is infinite, the condition of
Theorem 8 is no longer sufficient. For example, suppose that the x* are the
coordinate forms on the space E = K^, I being infinite (§ 2, no. 6) ; as
the x* are linearly independent, the condition of Theorem 8 holds for every
family (r) t ) but the system (21) only has solutions if the family (t)i) has
finite support.

A system (21) is always of finite rank if it has only a. finite number of equations
and its rank is then at most equal to the number of equations (no. 2, Proposition
1). Similarly, if E is of finite dimension n (which for a system (22) corresponds to
the case where there is only a. finite number n of unknowns), its dual E* is of dimen-
sion n and hence the rank of system (21) is at most equal to n (no. 3, Corollary 4
to Proposition 4). From this we deduce:

Corollary 1 . A system of scalar linear equations in a vector space, consisting of a
finite number of equations whose left hand sides are linearly independent forms, always
admits solutions.

Corollary 2. For a homogeneous linear system (22) of equations in n unknowns
with coefficients in a field K to admit non-trivial solutions consisting of elements of K,
it is necessary and sufficient that its rank be &lt; n.

This will always be the case if the number of equations is finite and &lt; n.

Corollary 3. For a linear system (22) with coefficients and right hand sides in a
field K, consisting of n equations in n unknowns, to have one and only one solution con-
sisting of elements of K, it is necessary and sufficient that the associated homogeneous
system have no non-trivial solution (or, what amounts to the same, that the left
hand sides of this system be linearly independent forms).

305



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

7. TENSOR PRODUCTS OF VECTOR SPACES

The results of §§ 3, 4 and 5 relating to free or projective modules apply in
particular to vector spaces and give the following properties :

Proposition 14. Given an exact sequence

(23) 0-^E'-&gt;E-^E"-&gt;0

of right vector spaces over afield K and linear mappings and a left vector space F over
K, the corresponding sequence ofL-linear mappings

0-&gt;E' ® K F-^E ® K F-&gt;E" ® K F-&gt;0

is exact and splits.

As the sequence (23) splits, this is a particular case of § 3, no. 7, Corollary
5 to Proposition 7 and § 3, no. 6, Proposition 5.

Because of Proposition 14, when E' is a vector subspace of E, j:TL' — &gt; E
the canonical injection, E' (g) K F is usually identified with a sub-Z-module of
E ® K F by means of the injection j ® 1 F . With this convention:

Corollary. Let K be a field, E a right vector space over K, F a left vector space
over K, (M a ) aeA a family of vector subspaces of E and (N B ) P6B a family of vector
subspaces ofF. Then

(24) (H A M„) ® K (n B N B ) = tt XL B (M. ® K N C ).
It is obviously sufficient to prove the particular case

(25) (n A M„)® K F= n A (M„® K F).

Clearly the left hand side of (25) is contained in the right hand side. To
prove the converse, we consider a basis (fxjhsi, °f E. Every element of E K F

can then be expressed uniquely in the form 2-, x k &lt;g&gt;f, where x K eE (§ 3,

no. 7, Corollary 1 to Proposition 7) ; if E' is a vector subspace of E, the

relation 2-, x % ®/ x e E' (g) K F is equivalent, by Proposition 14, to x x e E' for all

X € Ij

XeL To say that 2* x h ®f K belongs to each of the M a &lt;g) K F thus means
that for all XeL and all a e A, x K e M a , that is x K e D M a for all XgL,
which proves that the right hand side of (25) is contained in the left hand side.

Proposition 15. If (E x ) XeL is a family of right vector spaces over a field K and
(Eu)neM a family of left vector spaces over K, the canonical mapping

(26) (n b.) ® K (n f„) -jri „ ^ ® k f b)

(§ 3, no. 7, formula (22)) is injective.
306



TENSOR PRODUCTS OF VECTOR SPACES § 7.7

We write F = 1 1 F w ; the mapping (26) is the composition of the canonical
mappings

O e *K f ^E!&lt; e *®* f &gt;



and



n ( E,® K F)^n(ri(E,® K F 1 ,)) ;



as F and the E^ are vector spaces over K, this reduces to § 3, no. 7, Corol-
lary 3 to Proposition 7.

When the conditions of Proposition 15 are fulfilled, the tensor product

(11 E x I ® K (11 F w I is often identified with its canonical image in

n(E,® K F.).

With this convention :

Corollary. Let ¥ be a left vector space over K; for every set X, the left vector
space K d (g) K F is identified with the subspace of the space F x of all mappings of
X into F, consisting of the mappings u such that «(X) is of finite rank in F.

If (ft) is a basis of F, the element 2, v k (g) f K of K x (g) K F is identified

K B Li

under (26) with the mapping mZ v K (x)f K . As v K = except for the indices

X belonging to a finite subset H of L, the image of X under the above mapping
is contained in the finite-dimensional subspace of F generated by the f K of
indices X e H. Conversely, let «:X -&gt; F be a mapping such that m(X) is con-
tained in a finite-dimensional subspace G of F and let (b) 1&lt;i&lt;n be a basis

n

of G. For all x e X, we may write u(x) = 2, Vi(x)b u where the v t (x) are well
determined elements of K; thus n mappings ^rX -&gt; K are defined and clearly
u is then identified with the element 2, v, b,.

Similarly, for a right vector space E over K and a set Y, E &lt;g) K K Y is identi-
fied with a subspace of the space E Y , consisting of the mappings z&gt;:Y-&gt;E
such that v(Y) is of finite rank. More particularly, for every field K, K x (g) K K Y
is identified with a subspace of the space K XxY of mappings of X x Y

into K (K being considered as a (K, K)-bimodule) ; an element 2* u t ® v t ,
where u t is a mapping of X into K and v t a mapping of Y into K, is identi-
fied with the mapping (x,y) h-»- 2, u i (x)v i (y) of X x Y into K.

307



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Proposition 16. (i) Let K, L be two fields, E a left vector space over K,Fa left
vector space over L and G a (K, *L)-bimodule. Then the canonical Z-homomorphism

(27) v : Hom K (E, G) L F -&gt; Hom K (E, G L F)

(§ 4, no. 2, formula (7)) is injective; it is bijective when one of the vector spaces E,
F is finite-dimensional.

(ii) Let E 1} E 2 , F 1} F 2 be four vector spaces over a commutative field K; then
the canonical Yi-homomorphism

(28) X : Hom(E l5 F x ) Hom(E 2 , F 2 ) -&gt; Hom(E 1 E a , F x F 2 )

(§4, no. 4, formula (21)) is injective; it is bijective if one of the ordered pairs
(E 1} E 2 ), (E l5 F x ), (E 2 , F 2 ) consists of finite-dimensional spaces.

Assertion (i) is a particular case of § 4, no. 2, Proposition 2. Similarly the
second assertion of (ii) is a particular case of § 4, no. 4, Proposition 4. Finally, to
see that the homomorphism (28) is always injective, observe that Hom(E j5 F 4 )
is a vector subspace of Ff* (i = 1, 2) and that

Hom(E! E a , Fj &lt;g) F 2 )

is canonically identified with a vector subspace of the space (F x F 2 ) E i xE2
(II, § 3, no. 1, Proposition 1); when these identifications are made and also
the left hand side of (28) is identified with a subspace of F El Ff 2 (Proposi-
tion 14), the canonical mapping (28) becomes the restriction to this subspace
of the canonical mapping (26) and it has been seen (Proposition 15) that the
latter is injective.

Corollary 1. Let E and F be two vector spaces over afield K; the canonical mapping

E* K F-^Hom K (E,F)

(§ 4, no. 2, formula (11)) is injective; it is bijective when E or F is finite-dimen-
sional.

This is a special case of Proposition 16 (i).

Corollary 2. Let E be a right vector space and F a left vector space over the same
field K; the canonical mapping

(29) E K F-&gt;Hom K (E*,F)

(§ 4, no. 2, formula (15)) is injective; it is bijective when E is finite-dimensional.

This is a special case of § 4, no. 2, Remark 2.
Remarks. (1) Let K be a commutative field, E, F two vector spaces over K,

308



RANK OF AN ELEMENT OF A TENSOR PRODUCT § 7.8

(a K ) a basis of E and (£J a basis of F; then (a x &lt;g) b^) is a basis of the vector
K-space E ® K F (II, § 3, no. 7, Corollary 2 to Proposition 2) and therefore

(30) dim K (E &lt;g) K F) = dim K E . dim K F.

(2) Let K be a commutative field, E 1} E 2 , F l5 F 2 four vector spaces over K
and u:E x -&gt; F 1} rr.E 2 -&gt;- F 2 two linear mappings; then

(31) rg(w ® o) = rg(n) .rg(»).

It is immediate that (u ® z&gt;) (E x (g) E 2 ) is the canonical image of
t^Ej) (g) f(E 2 ) in F x &lt;g) F 2 and hence (Proposition 14) is isomorphic to
M(Ei) ® y(E 2 ) ; the conclusion then follows from (30).

(3) Under the same hypotheses as in Remark 1,

(32) dim K (Hom K (E, F)) &gt; dim K E.dim K F.

If E is isomorphic to K (I) , Hom(E, F) is isomorphic to (Hom(K, F)) 1 (§ 1,
no. 6, Corollary 1 to Proposition 6) and hence to F 1 (§ 1, no. 14) ; as F (I) is a
subspace of F 1 and dim(F (I) ) = Card(I) .dim F = dim E .dim F (no. 2, Propo-
sition 2), the inequality (32) follows from no. 3, Corollary 4 to Proposition 4.
The same argument shows that the two sides of (32) are equal when dim
E is finite (cf. § 10, nos. 3 and 4).

8. RANK OF AN ELEMENT OF A TENSOR PRODUCT

Let E be a right vector space and F a left vector space over the same field K;
to every element «eE ® K F there corresponds canonically under (29) a

homomorphism u x e Hom K (E*, F) ; if u — 2* x x ® y % with x x e E, y t e F, the
element u x is the linear mapping

(33) x**+2, &lt;**, *,&gt;#.

On the other hand, E ® K F is canonically identified with F ® K o E, where
E is considered as a left vector space and F as a right vector space over the
opposite field K°; thus there corresponds canonically to u a homomorphism
u 2 g Hom K (F*, E) given by

(34) y*^^x^y u y*y;

u x (resp. u 2 ), considered as a mapping of E* into F** (resp. of F* into E**)
is just the transpose of u 2 (resp. u^. The ranks of « x and u 2 are thus equal to the
same finite number r, the common dimension of the subspaces «i(E*) of F
and m 2 (F*) of E, each of which is canonically isomorphic to the dual of the
other (no. 5) ; we shall say that r (denoted rg(u)) is the rank of the element u of
E ® K F and that «i(E*) and u 2 (F*) are the subspaces (of F and E respectively)
associated with u.

309



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Proposition 1 7. Let u be an element of E ® K F and M &lt;= E and Nc F its

s

associated subspaces. For every expression u = 2^ x t ® y { o/" w, rt^r* x 4 e E anc?

y ( eF for 1 ^ z ^ s, the subspace M (resp. N) w contained in the subspace of E
(resp. F) generated by the x t (resp. the y t ). Moreover, the following properties are
equivalent:

(a) The integer s is equal to the rank ofu.

(b) The family {x?) liii&lt;s is a basis ofM..

(c) The family (yi)i&lt;f« s is a oas ^ ?/"N.

(d) The families (x t ) x ^ , ^ s awi (y ( ) i &lt; { « s 0^ both free.

By (33) (resp. (34)) each element of N = w x (E*) (resp. M = « a (F*)) is
a linear combination of the y x (resp. the * { ) ; whence the first assertion. If
s = r, the subspace generated by the x t (resp. y t ) with dimension ^dimM
(resp. ^ dim N) and containing M (resp. N) is identical with it and hence
(a) implies (b) and (c) and a fortiori (d). Conversely, each of conditions (b)
and (c) implies (a) by definition of rg(«). Finally if (d) holds, there exists a
family (xf) 1&lt;1&lt;s of elements of E* such that &lt;x 4 , xf} = 8 jy (no. 5, Corollary 1 to
Theorem 7) and hence it follows from (33) that (y { ) is a basis of N, which com-
pletes the proof.

Corollary 1. The rank of u is the smallest integer s such that there exists an expres-

s

sion u = 2* x t &lt;S&gt; !/i, where x t eE andy i e Ffor 1 &lt; z &lt; j.

This follows immediately from Proposition 17 and no. 2, Proposition 1.



Corollary 2. Let K be a commutative field, E, F two vector spaces over K and L
a commutative extension field of K. Let u be an element of E (g) K F, M and N its
associated subspaces and u' the canonical image of u in (E ® K F) (L) (canonically
identified with E (U ® L F (L) , cf. §5, no. 1, Proposition 3); then rg(u') = rg(w)
and the subspaces associated with u' are canonically identified with M (L) and N (L) .

r

If u = Z* Xi ® y u where the families (x t ) and (^) are free, then

r

u' = 4, (1 ®* ( ) ® (1 ®yi) and the families (1 ® x 4 ) and (1 ®y,) are
free in E (L) and F (L) respectively (§ 5, no. 1, Proposition 4).

9. EXTENSION OF SGALARS FOR A VECTOR SPACE

Recall (I, § 9, no. 1, Theorem 2) that a homomorphism of a field K into a
non-zero ring A is necessarily infective.

310



EXTENSION OF SCALARS FOR A VECTOR SPACE § 7.9

Proposition 18. Let p be a homomorphism of a field K into a ring A. For every exact
sequence of vector TH-spaces and K.-linear mappings

e'AeAe'

the sequence

^(A) &gt; -^(A) &gt; MA)

is exact.



This is a special case of no. 7, Proposition 14, taking account of § 1, no. 4,
Remark 4.

Corollary. For every YL-linear mapping /:E'-&gt;E, Im(yj A) ) = (Im(/)) (A) ,
Ker(/ (A) ) = (Ker(/)) (A) , Goker(/ (A) ) = (Coker(/)) (A) , to within canonical
isomorphisms.

Proposition 19. Let p be an injective homomorphism of a field K into a ring A.
For every left vector space E over K, the canonical mapping (j&gt; : E -&gt; p* (E) = A &lt;g) K E
is injective. Moreover, for every vector subspace E' of E, p*(E') = A ® K E' is
canonically identified with a direct factor sub-A-module of A ® K E and, with this
identification,

(35) (A ® K E')ne[&gt;(E) =$(£').

The first assertion is a special case of § 5, no. 1, Proposition 4; the second is a
special case of no. 7, Proposition 14; finally, to show (35), it suffices to take in A
(considered as a right K-module) a basis (a x ) Xe L such that a Ko = 1 for some in-
dex X (no. 1, Theorem 2) ; the elements of A ® K E can be written uniquely as

2-, a K ® x x with ^eE and, for such an element to belong to A ® K E', it is

necessary and sufficient that x^ e E' for all X. On the other hand, the elements of

&lt;}&gt;(E) are those for which x k = for X # X ; for an element Z, a k ® x x to belong

to (A ® K E') n &lt;j&gt;(E), it is necessary and sufficient that x K = for X ^ X and
x Kq e E', whence the conclusion.

Corollary. Let p be an injective homomorphism of a field K into a ring A. For a
Y^-linear mapping f: E -&gt; F (where E and F are two vector spaces over K) to be injec-
tive (resp. surjective, zero), it is necessary and sufficient that f (A) : E (A) -&gt; F (A) be
injective (resp. surjective, zero).

This follows immediately from Proposition 19 and the Corollary to Proposi-
tion 18.

311



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Proposition 20. Let p be a homomorphism of a field K into a ring A. For every
left vector space E over K, the canonical right A-module homomorphism

u:(E*) (A) -&gt;(E (A) )*

(§ 5, no. 4) is injective; it is bijective when E is finite-dimensional.

The second assertion follows from § 5, no. 4, Proposition 8. To prove

the first, we note that every element of (E*) (A) may be written as 2-, x* ® a i}

where a 4 G A and (*f)i&lt;i&lt; n is a. free family in E*; there corresponds to it in

(E (A)) * the hnear fonn &gt; S uch that ,.(1 ® „) = $ p«*, *,*»«, for all

x e E. But, there exists in E a family {x i )i &lt;i ^ n such that (x i} xfy = S y (no. 5,
Corollary 2 to Theorem 7), whence y*(l ® x t ) = a t ; the relation y* =
therefore implies a t = for all i, which proves our assertion.

Proposition 21. Let K be afield and L an extension field ofK..

(i) For every vector space E over K, dim l4 (E (L) ) = dim K E.

(ii) For every K-linear mapping u : E -&gt; F, where E anrf F ere vector spaces over
K, rg(w (L) ) = rg(«).

If (^ t )i e i is a basis of E over K, (1 ® * t ) lgI is a basis of E (L) over L (§ 5, no. 1,
Proposition 4), whence the first assertion; the second follows from the first and
the fact that m (L) (E (L) ) is canonically identified with (w(E)) (L) by the Corollary to
Proposition 18.

Proposition 22. Let K be a commutative field, p : K -&gt; A an injective central
homomorphism and E, F two vector spaces over K. Then the canonical homomorphism

(36) co : A ® K Hom(E, F) ^ Hom A (E (A) , F (A) )

(§ 5, no. 3, formula (17)) is injective; it is bijective if A or E is a finite-dimensional
vector space over K.

This is a particular case of § 5, no. 3, Proposition 7.

10. MODULES OVER INTEGRAL DOMAINS

Proposition 23. In a module E over an integral domain A, the set T of non-free
elements is a submodule of E.

If x and y are not free, there exist two non-zero elements a, (3 in A such
that vlx = and $y = 0. Then &lt;x(3 ^ since A is an integral domain and
a^(XA; + \xy) = for all X and p. in A since A is commutative, hence Ix + \y
is not free.

Remark. Let E be a module over any commutative ring A. If x is a non-free
element of E, every element of the submodule Ax is non-free. On the

312



MODULES OVER INTEGRAL DOMAINS § 7.10

other hand, if A contains divisors of 0, the sum of two non-free elements
of E may be free; for example, in Z/6Z considered as a module over itself,
3 and 4 are not free, but 3 + 4 = 1 is free.

Proposition 23 leads to the following definition:

Definition 5. In a module E over an integral domain A, the torsion submodule of
E is the submodule of E consisting of the non-free elements (also called the torsion
elements of E) .

When E is equal to its torsion submodule (that is when every element of E
is annihilated by an element ^0 of A) E is called a torsion module. When the
torsion submodule of E is reduced to (that is every non-zero element of E
is free) E is called (by an abuse of language) a torsion-free module.

Every submodule of a free A-module (and in particular every projective
A-module) is torsion-free. The Z-module Q, is torsion-free.

Proposition 24. Let A be an integral domain. For every A-module E, let T(E)
denote the torsion submodule ofE. Letf:E-+E' be an A-linear mapping, E and E'
being A-modules.

(i) /(T(E)) c T(E').

(ii) Iff is injective, /(T(E)) = T(E') n/(E).

(iii) IffissurjectiveandKer(f) c T(E), thenf(T{E)) = T(E').

Assertions (i) and (ii) are obvious. On the other hand, iff is surjective and
x' e T(E'), then x' = f(x), where xeE, and by hypothesis there exists a ^
in A such that/(a#) = ccx' = 0; whence a# e Ker(/) and by the hypothesis
there exists [J # in A such that (3 (a*) = 0; as (3a ^ 0, x e T(E).

Corollary 1. For every A-module E, E/T(E) is torsion-free.

If f: E —&gt; E' is an A-linear mapping, let f T denote the mapping
T(E) -&gt;T(E') with the same graph as the restriction of / to T(E). With
this notation:



Corollary 2. For every exact sequence of A-modules and A-linear mappings

&gt; E' -£&gt; E -i-&gt; E"

the sequence

— &gt; T(E') -^&gt; T(E) -^&gt; T(E ff )
is exact.

Ker(£ T ) = Ker(£) n T(E) =/(E')nT(E) =/(T(E')) = Im(/ T ).

Proposition 25. Let A be an integral domain and (E t ) a family of A-modules;
then

(37) T(©E t ) = 0T(E t ).

313



LINEAR ALGEBRA



Let (# t ) be an element of \£&gt; E t such that x l eT(E t ) for all i; then each

of the x t is annihilated by an element a t ^ of A and it may be assumed that
a t = 1 when x t = 0; as the family (# t ) has finite support, the element

a = 1 1 a, of A is defined and ^0: it obviously annihilates \D x l and hence
kB T(E t ) c= t(© EJ ; the converse is immediate.

If E and F are two A-modules, clearly T(E ® A F) contains the canonical
images of T(E) &lt;g) A F and E &lt;g&gt; A T(F); but examples can be given of
torsion-free A-modules E, F such that T(E &lt;g) A F) ^ (Exercise 31).

Note that an infinite product of torsion modules is not necessarily a tor-

00

sion module; for example, in the Z-module 1 1 (Z/p n Z) (p an integer &gt; 1),

n = 1

the element all of whose coordinates are 1 is free.

Proposition 26. Let A be an integral domain, K its field of fractions, E an A-
module and E (K) = K ® A E the vector space over K obtained by extending the ring
of operators; let &lt;j&gt; denote the canonical A-linear mapping x*-*l &lt;g&gt;xofE into E (K) .

(i) Every element ofE (K) is of the form \- 1 ^{x)for XeA,\=£OandxeE.

(ii) The kernel of§ is the torsion submodule T(E) ofE.

n

(i) Every element of E (K) is of the form z = 2, St&lt;K*i) with ^ eK and

n

Xi e E; for all i, there exists « ( eA such that &lt;x 4 ^ and a^j e A; if a = 1 = 1 a t ,
then a ^ and oc£i = &amp; e A for all i, whence, in E (K) ,

» / n \

z = a-^oz) = a" 1 2 M&gt;fo) = a-^12 fr* f )

since (j&gt; is A-linear.

(ii) If x 7^ is not free in E, there exists a ^ in A such that ax = 0,
whence o«}&gt;(x) = &lt;|&gt;(ax) = in E (K) , which implies &lt;j&gt;(x) = 0. Conversely, sup-
pose that, for some x e E, 1 ® x = in E (K) ; we show that * is a torsion element
of E. We consider the set 911 oimonogenous sub- A-modules of K; this is a right
directed set under the relation of inclusion, for any two elements a, (3 of K can
be written as a = Xr 1 ^ (3 = X,-\, where £, t], £ belong to A and X, # 0, hence
A.acA.i^" 1 and A. (3 &lt;= A.£ _1 . Moreover K is the union of the modules
M e 321 and can therefore be considered as the direct limit of the direct system de-
fined by the modules M e 3K and the canonical injections (§ 6, no. 2, Remark).
Hence also, to within a canonical isomorphism, E (K) = lim (M &lt;g) A E) (§ 6, no.
3, Proposition 7) and the relation 1 ® x = in E (K) implies that there exists an

314



MODULES OVER INTEGRAL DOMAINS §7.10

M e 3R such that 1 e M and 1 (g) x = in the tensor product M ® A E (Set Theory,
III, § 7, no. 5, Lemma 1). It may further be supposed (replacing if need be M
by a monogenous submodule M' =&gt; M of K) that M = A.y -1 , where y e A
and y^O. Now the mapping \ *-&gt;• y£ is an isomorphism of M onto the A-
module A; on the other hand, the canonical isomorphism A ® A E -&gt; E (§3,
no. 4, Proposition 4) maps \ &lt;g) x to the element £x of E; thus there exists an
isomorphism M ® A E -» E which maps the tensor product £ ® x to the element
(y5)* of E. The hypothesis 1 &lt;g) x = in M &lt;g&gt; A E thus implies yx = 0.

Remark. Let a -1 &lt;j&gt;(x), P -1 &lt;i&gt;(y) be two elements of E (K) , with aeA, (3eA,
xeE, yeE, oi.fi # 0. In order that a _1 &lt;|&gt;(#) = p _1 (J&gt;(y), it is necessary and
sufficient that fix — ay he a, torsion element of E, for this relation is equivalent to
fi$(x) = o«j&gt;(y), which may also be written §(fix — ay) = 0.

Corollary 1 . If E is a torsion-free A-module, the canonical mapping (j&gt; : E -» E (K)
is injective.

Recall (§ 5, no. 1) that for every A-linear mapping of E into a vector space F
over K, there exists one and only one K-linear mapping f: E (K) — &gt; F such that
/ =f° &lt;j&gt;; we shall say that /is associated with/.

Corollary 2. Let f be an A-linear mapping of E into a vector space F over K;
j/"Ker(/) c T(E), the Yi-linear mapping f associated with f is injective.

We write an element of Ker(/) in the form X~ 1 ^(x), where XeA, X ^ 0,
xeE; the relation /(X -1 &lt;j&gt; (x)) = is equivalent to X~ /((}&gt;(#)) = in F and
hence tof(x) =f($(x)) = 0. By hypothesis, this implies #eT(E) and hence
(j&gt;(#) = 0, which proves the corollary.

Corollary 3. Let E be an A-module and g an A-linear mapping of E into a vector
space F over K such that g(E) generates F and Ker(g) &lt;= T(E). Then the ~K-linear
mapping g associated with g is an isomorphism ofE (K) onto F.

g is injective by Corollary 2 and the hypothesis that g(E) generates F
implies that g is surjective.

For every A-module E, the vector space E (K) is said to be associated with E.
For every subset S of E the rank of S over K (or by an abuse of language, the
rank of S) is the rank of the canonical image (j)(S) of S in E (K) , in other words
(no. 2, Definition 1) the dimension over K of the vector subspace of E (K)
generated by &lt;[&gt;(S).

When E is a torsion-free A-module, it is usually identified with its canonical
image &lt;{&gt;(E) in E (K) . With this convention, every generating system of E con-
tains a basis of E (K) (no. 1, Theorem 2). In particular:

Corollary 4. Every finitely generated A-module is of finite rank.

315



U LINEAR ALGEBRA

Note that the converse of this corollary is not necessarily true; for example
Q, is a Z-module of rank 1 but is not finitely generated over Z.

Recall (§ 5, no. 1) that for every linear mapping /: E ~» E' (where E and
E' are A-modules),/ (K) denotes the K-linear mapping 1 K ®f:E (K) -» E { ' K) .

Proposition 27. For every exact sequence

E' _Z&gt; E -^» E"

of K-linear mappings, the corresponding sequence ofY^-linear mappings

El Ak)^ 17 £(K&gt; „„
(K) *" ^(K) &gt; ^(K)

is exact.

Suppose that g ( K)(^ -1 ® *) = 0, with XeA, X^O, #eE; this is equiva-
lent to X" 1 ® g(x) = in E(' K) and hence also to

l®g(x) =X(X- 1 &lt;g)^(x)) =0;

by Proposition 26, there exists a ^ in A such that a.g(x) = in E", or also
g(cuc) = 0. By hypothesis, there is therefore an x' gE' such that ax — f(x')
and therefore X -1 ® x =fao( 0! -~ 1 '^~ 1 ® x ')&gt; which proves the proposition.

Corollary 1. If E' is a submodule ofE, E( K) is canonically identified with a vector
subspace o/*E (K) and (E/E') (K) with E (K) /E( K) .

It suffices to apply Proposition 27 to the exact sequence

-&gt; E' -» E -&gt; E/E' -&gt; 0.

Corollary 2. For every K-linear mapping /:E-»F, Ker(y^ K) ) = (Ker(/)) (K) ,
Im(y( K) ) = (Im(jf)) (K) , Coker (f&lt;x&gt;) = (Coker(/)) (K) to within canonical iso-
morphisms. In particular, for f K) to be infective (resp. surjective, resp. zero), it is
necessary and sufficient that Ker(jf) ^ T(E) (resp. that Coker (f) be a torsion
module, resp. that Im(f) c: T(F)).

This follows from Corollary 1 and Proposition 26.

Corollary 3. Let E be an K-module and (x K ) KeLl a family of elements qfE. For
(x x ) to be a free family, it is necessary and sufficient that in the vector *5L-space E (K)
the family (1 ® x K ) be free.

The family (x K ) defines an A-linear mapping/: A (L) — &gt; E such thatf(e K ) = x K
for all X e L ((e K ) being the canonical basis of A (L) ) and to say that (x K ) is free
means that f is injective. It suffices to apply Corollary 2 toj^ observing that
A (L) is torsion-free (Proposition 25).

316



DEFINITION OF k'-STRUCTURES § 8. 1

S 8 RESTRICTION OF THE FIELD OF SGALARS
IN VECTOR SPACES

Throughout this paragraph, K denotes afield and K' a subfield ofK. On a set V, a
right (resp. left) vector space structure over K defines, by restriction of scalar s, a right
(resp. left) vector space structure over K'.

1. DEFINITION OF K'-STRUCTURES

Proposition 1. Let V be a right vector space over K and V a subset ofV which is
a vector subspace over K'. The following conditions are equivalent :

(a) The K-linear mapping X of V ( ' K) = V &lt;g&gt; K , K into V such that
X(*' &lt;g&gt; a = x'lfor all x' eV'^e K, is bijective.

(b) Every K '-linear mapping f ofV into a vector K-space W can be extended
uniquely to a K-linear mapping f of "V into W.

(c) Every basis ofV over K' is a basis ofV over K.

(d) There exists a basis ofW over K' which is also a basis ofV over K.

(e) The vector K-space V is generated by V and every subset of V free over K
is free over K.

We know (§ 5, no. 1) that V ( ' K) has a right vector K-space structure
under which (*' ® Ql = x' &lt;g) (&amp;q) (5, tj in K, *' e V) and that for every
K'-linear mapping/' of V into a vector K-space W, there exists one and only
one K-linear mapping/' of V ( ' K) into W such that/'(x' ® 1) =/'(*') for
x' e V. If j is the canonical injection of V into V, X is just the corresponding
K-linear mapping j. If X is bijective, then for every K'-linear mapping
/':V' -&gt; W,/' o X" 1 is the unique K-linear mapping of V into W extending
/'; in other words, (a) implies (b). Conversely, if (b) holds, there exists in
particular a K-linear mapping [i of V into V ( ' K) such that y.(x') = x' &lt;g&gt; 1
for all x'gV; it is immediate that [x ° X = 1 V ; K) ; on the other hand,
X(fx(*')) = x' for all x' e V and, as by hypothesis j : V -^ V can be extended
uniquely to an endomorphism of V, of necessity X o jx = l v , which completes
the proof that (a) and (b) are equivalent.

For every basis B' of V over K', the set B of elements v' &lt;g&gt; 1 of V ( ' K) , where
v' runs through B', is a basis of V ( ' K) over K (§ 5, no. 1, Proposition 4) and
X(B) = B'. For X to be bijective, it is necessary that the image under X of
every basis of V ( ' K) be a basis of V over K and it is sufficient that it be so for a
single basis of V ( ' K) (§ 1, no. 11, Corollary 2 to Proposition 17). This proves the
equivalence of (a), (c) and (d).

As every subset of V which is free over K' is contained in a basis of V
over K' (§ 7, no. 1, Theorem 2), (c) implies (e). Finally, suppose that (e) holds;
if B' is a basis ofV' over K', it is a free subset of V over K; on the other hand B'

317



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

generates V over K' and hence generates V over K by hypothesis; therefore B'
is a basis of V over K, which proves that (e) implies (c).

Definition 1 . Let V be a right vector space over a field K and K' a subfield of K.
Every vector sub-K 'space VofW satisfying the equivalent conditions of Proposition 1
is called a K' '-structure on V.

Example. Let B be a basis of V over K. For every subfield K' of K, the vector
sub-K '-space of V generated by B admits B as a basis over K' and hence is
a K'-structure on V. *For example, if K is commutative and V is taken to be
the polynomial K-algebra K[X 1} . . ., X n ], then, for every subfield K' of K,
K'[X l3 . . ., X n ] is a K'-structure on V.*

2. RATIONALITY FOR A SUBSPACE

Definition 2. Let V be a right vector space over K, with a K' '-structure V. A vector
ofVis said to be rational over K' if it belongs to V. A vector sub-K-space Wo/V
is said to be rational over K' if it is generated (over K) by vectors rational over K'.

Let (z&gt; t ')iei De a basis of V over K', which is therefore also a basis of V over
K (no. 1, Proposition 1). For a vector x = 2, vfa of V to be rational over

K', it is necessary and sufficient that l- t e K' for all i e I.

If W is a vector sub-K-space of V which is rational over K', it follows from
Definition 2 that W = W n V is a vector sub-K'-space of W, which generates
W over K; on the other hand every subset of W which is free over K' is also
free over K since it is contained in V (no. 1, Proposition 1). It follows (no. 1,
Proposition 1) that W is a K'-structure on W said to be induced by the K'-struc-
ture V on V.

For every vector sub-K'-space W of V, we shall denote by W . K the
vector sub-K-space of V consisting of the linear combinations of elements of
W with coefficients in K.

Proposition 2. Let V be a right vector space over K and V a K '-structure on V.
The mapping W h-&gt; W . K is a bijection of the set of vector sub-K! -spaces of V
onto the set of vector sub-K-spaces of V which are rational over K' and the inverse
bijection wWi-&gt;Wn V.

Clearly the bijection X _1 :V-&gt; V ® K , K, the inverse of the bijection X
defined in no. 1, Proposition 1, maps every vector sub-K'-space W of V onto
its image under the canonical injection x' t-&gt; x' 1 and W . K onto W (g&gt; K , K ;
the assertions of Proposition 2 are thus consequences of Definition 2 and § 7,
no. 9, Proposition 19.

Corollary 1 . Every sum and every intersection of vector sub-K-spaces of V which
are rational over K' is a rational sub space over K'.

318



RATIONALITY FOR A LINEAR MAPPING § 8.3

The assertion concerning sums is obvious. On the other hand, if (Wi') teI is
a family of vector sub-K'-spaces of V, then (H W t ') ® K , K = H (W, &lt;g&gt; K , K)
(§ 7, no. 7, Corollary to Proposition 14), which proves the corollary.

A basis B of V over K is said to be rational over K' if it consists of vectors
which are rational over K'.

Corollary 2. Every basis qfV over K which is rational over K' is a basis ofV
over K'.

If W is the vector sub-K'-space of V generated by B, then
W'.K = V = V'.K, whence V = W by virtue of Proposition 2.

3. RATIONALITY FOR A LINEAR MAPPING

Definition 3. Let V l5 V 2 be two right vector spaces over K with K' '-structures Vi,
V 2 respectively. A K.-linear mapping f:V 1 -&gt;V 2 ** s °id t° be rational over K' if
/(Vi) &lt;= V 2 .

If V 3 is a third right vector space over K, with a K'-structure V 3 and a
K-linear mapping g:V 2 -&gt;V 3 is rational over K', clearly g °f'.yi^V 3 is
rational over K'.

Proposition 3. Let V l5 V 2 be two right vector spaces over K and Vi, V 2 K'-
structures on V l5 V 2 respectively. V x (resp. V 2 ) is canonically identified with Vi ® K , K
(resp. V 2 ® K , K) (no. 1, Proposition 1).

(i) The mapping/' \-&gt;f ® 1 K = fU) is a bisection o/"Hom K &gt;(Vi, V 2 ) onto the
set qfK-linear mappings ofW 1 into V 2 which are rational over K'; the inverse bisec-
tion associates with every ~K-linear mapping f:V 1 -^-W 2 rational over K' the K'-
linear mapping f ' : Vi -&gt; V 2 with the same graph as the restriction off to Vi.

(ii) For every ^.-linear mapping f\\ x -&gt; V 2 rational over K',

/(Vi) =/(V x ) H V 2 and f (V 2 ) = Vi + Ker(/).

(i) Clearly with the above identifications, if/':Vi~^-V 2 is a K '-linear
mapping, / ( k) = /' ® 1 K is rational over K' and /' is the mapping with the
same graph as the restriction off^ to Vi. Conversely, ifjfrVj— &gt;-V 2 is a
K-linear mapping rational over K' and/':Vi -&gt; V 2 has the same graph as
the restriction off to Vi, f and fl m coincide on Vi, which is a generating
system of V x over K, hence/ = f^ y

(ii) If / = /' 1 K , then/CVO =/(Vi ®K-K) = /'(Vi) &lt;g) K , K and, as

/'(Vi) c V 2 ,/(Vi) =/'(Vi) =/(V0 n V 2 (§ 7, no. 9, Proposition 19); the

-1
formula/ (V 2 ) = Vi + Ker(/) follows immediately.

319



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Corollary 1. In the notation of Proposition 3, Im(/) = (Im(/')) (K) ,

Ker(/) = (Ker(/')) ( K), Coker(/) = (Coker(/')) (K) .

In particular ; for f 'to be infective (resp. surjective, zero), it is necessary and sufficient
thatf be so. Iff is bijective, its inverse mapping is rational over K'.

This is a particular case of § 7, no. 9, Corollary to Proposition 18.

Corollary 2. Letf:V x — &gt; V 2 be a ¥L-linear mapping rational over K'. For every

vector sub-K-space W x of V t (resp. W 2 of V 2 ) rational over K', f(W x ) (resp.

-l

f (W 2 )) is a vector sub-K-space ofV 2 (resp. Vj) rational over K'.

In the notation of Proposition 3, for every vector sub-K'-space W[ of
v i 5 /(K)(Wi ® K 'K) =/'(Wi) ® K 'K; whence the assertion relating to W x
(no. 2, Proposition 2). On the other hand, let W 2 be a vector sub-K'-space
of V 2 and let g' be the canonical K'-linear mapping V 2 -» V 2 /W 2 ; then

f\w 2 ) = Ker(g' of); hence, by Corollary 1,

}fk)(W 2 &lt;g) K , K) =7'\wi) ®k&lt; K,
whence the assertion relating to W 2 .

Let Vj, V 2 be two right vector K-spaces with K'-structures Vi, V 2 respec-
tively. It is immediate that VJ. x V 2 is a K' -structure on V x x V 2 , called the
product of the K'-structures Vi and V 2 .

Proposition 4. For a ~K-linear mapping f:W 1 — &gt; V 2 to fee rational over K', if is
necessary and sufficient that its graph Y be rational over YJ for the product YJ -structure
on Vj x V 2 .

Let g be the mapping x x i-&gt; (x 1 ,f(x 1 )) from Vj to Vj x V 2 ; this is a K-
linear mapping such that V = g(V x ) ; if/ is rational over K', so is T by virtue
of Corollary 2 to Proposition 3. Conversely, suppose that T is rational over
K' and let it have the K'-structure induced by that on V x x V 2 ; it follows
immediately from the definitions that the restrictions p 1} p 2 to V of the pro-
jections pr l3 pr 2 , are K-linear mappings, rational over K' of F into V x and
V 2 respectively. As p x is bijective, its inverse mapping q x is rational over K'
(Corollary 1 to Proposition 3) and hence so is/ = p 2 ° q x .

4. RATIONAL LINEAR FORMS

Let V be a right vector space over K with a K'-structure V. As K^ is a K'-
structure on the right vector K-space K d , we may define linear forms x* e V*,
rational over K', as the linear mappings of V into K d , rational over K' for the

320



APPLICATION TO LINEAR SYSTEMS § 8.5

K'-structures on V and K d . By virtue of no. 3, Proposition 3, the set R' of these
linear forms is the image of the dual V* of V under the composite mapping

(1) V* -^&gt; K ® K , V* -^ V*

where &lt;{&gt;(*'*) = 1 ® *'* and u(£ ® *'*) is the linear formy* on V such that
y*(x') = £&lt;*'*, x'} for all x' e V (§ 5, no. 4). We know that this mapping is in-
jective (§ 7, no. 9, Propositions 20 and 19) and clearly R' is a left vector sub-K'-
space of V* ; moreover every subset of R' free over K' is free over K. But in
general R' does not necessarily generate V* over K and does not therefore define a
K'-structure on V* (Exercise 2). However, if V is of finite dimension n over K,
V* is of dimension n over K' and R' then defines canonically a K'-structure on
V*.

Proposition 5. Let V be a right vector space over K, V a K '-structure on V and
W a vector sub-K.-space ofV. For W to be rational over K', it is necessary and sufficient
that there exist a set H cr V* of rational linear forms over K' such that W is the
orthogonal ofHinV (§ 2, no. 4).

Let H be a subset of V* whose elements are rational linear forms over K\
For all x* e H, the kernel of x* is a vector sub-K-space of V, rational over
K' (no. 3, Corollary 2 to Proposition 3) ; the intersection of these kernels is
therefore also a vector sub-K-space of V, rational over K' (no. 2, Corollary 1 to
Proposition 2).

Conversely, let W be a vector sub-K-space of V rational over K', so that
W is identified with W &lt;g&gt; K . K, where W'=WnV (no. 2, Proposition 2).
For a linear form *'* 6 V* to be zero on W, it is necessary and sufficient that
the linear form x* e V* which corresponds to it under (1) be zero on W, for by
no. 3, Corollary I to Proposition 3,

Ker(**) = (Ker(*'*)) ® K , K and Ker(**') = (Ker(**)) n V.

Let H' be the orthogonal of W in V* ; we know (§ 7, no. 5, Theorem 7)
that W is the orthogonal of H' in V; if H is the image of H' in V* under the
mapping (1), it follows from the above that W is the orthogonal of H in V,
taking account of no. 7, Corollary to Proposition 14.

5. APPLICATION TO LINEAR SYSTEMS

Proposition 6. (i) Given a system of homogeneous linear equations

(2) |a^ = ((xeM)

whose coefficients a^ belong to K', every solution (£ t ) of this system consisting of elements
of K. is a linear combination with coefficients in K of solutions (£() of (2) consisting
of elements o/"K'.

321



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

(ii) Given a system of linear equations

(3) 2a u ^ = p u QxeM)

whose coefficients a wt and right hand sides (3^ belong to K', if there exists a solution to
the system consisting of elements ofK, there also exists a solution consisting of elements
ofK'.

(i) For every set S, let the right vector K-space K4 S) be given the K'-
structure Kd &lt;S) . Let / be the K-linear mapping of K™ into K4 M) mapping

every vector (^)iei to the vector (Cu)hsm d enne d by £ w = 2-, a w ^ for all
pi e M. Clearly f is rational over K' ; its kernel V, which is the set of solu-
tions in K of the system (2), is a subspace of K ( d I} rational over K' (no. 3, Corol-
lary 2 to Proposition 3) and hence generated by the solutions of (2) in K\

(ii) We consider K as a left vector K'-space; there exists a K'-linear pro-
jector p of K onto its vector subspace K' s (§7, no. 3, Proposition 4); if

(£ t ) is a solution of (3) in K, then 2, a w /&gt;(^ t ) = P\£ a w 5ij = jKPn) = Pu, which
proves that (/&gt;(£ t )) is a solution of (3) in K'.

A ring K is called (left) faithfully flat over a subring K' if Proposition 6
holds for K and K'; we shall study this notion in detail later (Commutative
Algebra, I, § 3).

6. SMALLEST FIELD OF RATIONALITY

Let V be a right vector K-space with a K'-structure V. For every field L
such that K' c L c K, we write V L = V'.L; clearly every basis of V
over K' is a basis of V over K and a basis of V L over L. Hence V L is an L-
structure on V and V a K'-structure on V L .

Proposition 7. (i) Let V be a right vector K-space with a K '-structure V. For
every vector x e V (resp. every vector sub-K-space Wo/V), the set of subfields L,ofK
containing K' and such that x (resp. W) is rational over L has a least element K'(x)
(resp. K'(W)).

(ii) Let V l5 V 2 be two right vector K-spaces with K' -structures Vi, V 2 respec-
tively. For every K-linear mapping f of "V^ into V 2 , the set of subfields Lo/K con-
taining K' and such that f is rational over L has a least element K'(/).

We first prove assertion (i) for a vector x e V. Let B be a basis of V rational
over K'; B is a basis of V over K' and a basis of V L over L for every field L

such that K' c L c K; for ^ = £* b£ b to be rational over L, it is necessary
322



CRITERIA FOR RATIONALITY § 8.7

and sufficient that the £ b belong to L (no. 2) and hence the smallest field L
with this property is the field generated by K', and the £ b for b eB.

We next prove (ii). Let B l5 B 2 be bases of V 1} V 2 respectively, which are

rational over K' and write, for all b x eB 1 ,/(^ 1 ) = zL, b 2 a. b2bl (*the family

(&lt;x b2bl ) is just the matrix off with respect to the bases B x and B 2 ; cf. § 10,
no. 4 # ). As B x (resp. B 2 ) is a basis of (V^l (resp. (V 2 )t.) °ver L for every field
such that K' c L c K, for/ to be rational over L, it is necessary and sufficient
that the a 6a6l belong to L; the smallest field with this property is therefore
the field generated by K' and the a b2&amp;1 for b x e B l5 b 2 e B 2 .

Finally, to establish assertion (i) for a subspace W of V, we shall first prove
the following lemma :

Lemma 1. Let V be a right vector Y^-space with a YJ -structure V and W a vector
sub-K-space of V. There exist two vector sub-K-spaces W l5 W 2 of V, rational over
K', such that V is the direct sum o/~ W x and W 2 and, ifV is identified with W x x W 2 ,
W is the graph of a YAinear mapping g ofVsf x into W 2 .

Let B be a basis of V rational over K'. Applying Theorem 2 of § 7, no. 1,
to a basis of W over K, considered as a free subset of V, and the generating
system the union of this free subset and B, it is seen that there exists a subset
G of B such that V is the direct sum of W and the subspace W 2 of V generated
by C. Also let W x be the subspace of V generated by B — C. As B cz V',
clearly W x and W 2 are rational over K'. Moreover, for all x e W 1} there
exists one and only one vector g(x) of W 2 such that x + g(x) e W, since V is
the direct sum of W and W 2 ; then W is the graph of g and g is K-linear since
W is a vector sub-K-space of V.

Having proved this lemma, it is known that W is rational over a subfield
L of K containing K' if and only if g is rational over L (no. 3, Proposition 4).
The smallest field K'(g) such that g is rational over K'(g) is therefore also the
smallest field over which W is rational.

7. CRITERIA FOR RATIONALITY

For every subfield L of K, let End L (K) denote the endomorphism ring of K
considered as a left vector space over L; if L contains K', End L (K) is a subring
of End K /(K). For every subset ^ of End K /(K), there exists a largest subfield
L of K containing K' and such that ^ is contained in End L (K), namely the
set of \ e K such that &lt;K£t)) = £-&lt;K?}) f° r all 73 e K and all &lt;j&gt; e dt (it is im-
mediately verified that this set is a ring and, on the other hand, replacing 7)
by £ -1 7) in the preceding relation, we obtain &lt;j&gt;(£ -1 7)) = £ -1 .&lt;j&gt;(t)) when
E, ^ 0). We shall call this field the centralizer of Jt in K and denote it by x(~^)«
Now let V be a right vector K-space with a K'-structure V. For all
&lt;j&gt; eEnd K -(K), there exists one and only one endomorphism (j) v of the Z-

323



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

module V such that &lt;J&gt; V (*'.£) =*'.«[&gt;(!;) for x'eV and £eK: for, in
no. 1, a Z-isomorphism X of V (g) K , K onto V was defined which maps
x' &lt;S&gt; Z, to x' . Z, and § v is necessarily equal to X o (l v , (g) &lt;j&gt;) o x -1 .

Theorem 1. Let *£ be a subset of End K &lt;(K) and L = %{^) the subfield of K
the centralizer of*M.

(i) Let V be a right vector K.-space with a K' -structure. For a vector x e V to be
rational over L, it is necessary and sufficient that &lt;j) v (#.Tj) = *-&lt;{&gt;(' / )) f or a ^ § e ^
and all tj e K. For a vector sub-K-space W of V to be rational over L, it is necessary
and sufficient that &lt;}&gt;v(W) c: Wfor all § e Jt.

(ii) Let V 1} V 2 be two right vector ~K-spaces each with a K' -structure. For a K-
linear mapping f of V x into V 2 to be rational over L, it is necessary and sufficient that
f($Vi( x i)) — §v 2 (f( x i))f or a M x i e Vi and all § e *Jf.

We first prove assertion (i) for x. Let B be a basis of V rational over K'
and write x = 2L b.% b ; then, for (j&gt; e &lt;Jt and tj g K,

&lt;j&gt; v (x.7)) - x.&lt;j&gt;fa) = i Q M&lt;KW - ^.&lt;|)(tq))
and therefore, the relations

"for all § eJt and all tj eK, &lt;j&gt; v (x.7j) = x.&lt;j&gt;(tj)"
and

"for all tj&gt; e J(, all 6 e B and all tj e K, &lt;j&gt;(^tj) = £«,.$(*])"

are equivalent. The second of these relations means that for all £ e B, £ b e x0^0&gt;
which proves the first assertion of (i) .

We next prove (ii). For/ to be rational over L, it is necessary and sufficient
that, for all x[ eVj rational over K.',f(x[) is a vector in V 2 rational over L;
this will imply that/(x x ) is rational over L for every vector x x of V x rational
over L, such a vector being a linear combination with coefficients in L of
vectors rational over K'. The above condition is equivalent, by the first part
of the argument, to the relation

(4) /(*£) . &lt;j&gt;(7)) = &lt;hr a (/(*i) -V)) for ef&gt; 6 JC and 73 e K
which may also be written

(5) /($vi (*i • l)) = $v a (/(*i • l)) for $ e -^ and tj e K.

As every element of Vj. is a linear combination with coefficients in K of
elements of W x rational over K', condition (5) is equivalent to

/(M*i)) = *v.(/(*0)

for all x x e V x and all &lt;j&gt; e ^t '.
324



DEFINITION OF AFFINE SPACES § 9.1

Finally, to prove the second assertion in (i), we use no. 6, Lemma 1 : W is the
graph of a K-linear mapping g: Wj -&gt; W 2 and W is rational over if and only if
the mapping g is rational over L (no. 3, Proposition 4). By (ii), for g to be
rational over L, it is necessary and sufficient that g(&lt;j&gt; W i(*i)) = §w 2 {g( x i)) f° r
all *! e Wi and all &lt;J&gt; e Jt\ as § v = &lt;j&gt; Wl x &lt;|&gt; W2 , the above condition means that
the graph W of g is stable under &lt;|) v for all § e Jt .



§ 9. AFFINE SPACES AND PROJECTIVE SPACES



1. DEFINITION OF AFFINE SPACES

Definition 1. Given a left (resp. right) vector space T over afield K, an qffine space
attached to T is any homogeneous space E of the additive group T (I, § 5, no. 5) such
that is the only operator in T leaving invariant all the elements of E (that is, T oper-
ates faithfully and transitively on E). Under these conditions, T is called the transla-
tion space of Ei and its elements are called the translations ofE (or free vectors ofJL).

In what follows we shall confine our attention to the case where T is a
left vector space over K. The dimension (over K) of the translation vector
space T of an affine space E is called the dimension of E (over K) and is de-
noted by dim E or dim K E. An affine space of dimension one (resp. two) is
called an qffine line (resp. an affine plane). The elements of an affine space are
also called points.

Under the conditions of Definition 1, for t g T and a e E we shall denote
by t + a or a + t the transform of the point a under t. Then the relations

(1) s + (t + a) = (s + t) + a, + a = a

hold for s e T, t g T, a e E. The mapping x h-&gt; x + t is a bijection of E onto
itself, which we identify with t. Definition 1 moreover implies that, for all
a e E, the mapping t ■-»» t + a is a bijection of T onto E. In other words, given
two points a, b of E, there exists one and only one translation t such that
b = t + a; we shall denote this translation by b — a; then the formulae

(2) a - a = 0, a - b = —{b — a) t b = (b - a) + a

(c — b) + (b — a) = c — a

hold for a e E, b e E, ceE. If four points a, b, a', b' of E are such that
b — a = b' — a', the formula

b' = (b' - b) + (b - a) + a = (b' - a') + (a' - a) + a

and the commutativity of addition in T show that b' — b = a' — a.

325



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Given a point agE, the mapping x h-&gt; x — a is a bijection of E onto T;
when E is identified with T under this mapping, we say that E is considered
as the vector space obtained by taking a as origin in E. Conversely, every vector
space T has canonically the structure of an affine space attached to T, namely
the homogeneous space structure corresponding to the subgroup {0} of T
(I, §5, no. 6).

Remark. The definitions of this no. and some of the results which follow
extend immediately to the case where, instead of a vector space T, we
consider an arbitrary commutative group with operators T.

2. BARYCENTRIC CALCULUS

Proposition 1. Let {x t ) iel be a family of points in an affine space E and (X t ) lsL

a family of elements of K of finite support such that Z, X t = 1 I resp. Z, X t = J
If a is any point ofE, the point xeE defined by

x — a = 2* \(x t — a)

iel s '

(resp. the free vector 2 X t (* t — a)) is independent of the point considered.
If a' is another point of E, then

2 X t (x t - a') = 2 X t ((x t -a) + (a- a')) = 2 \{x - a) + (2 X t )(&lt;z - a').

If 2 \ = 1, then 2 X t (* t -a) = (x-a) + (a-a') =x - a'; if 2, X t = 0,
then 2 X t (* - a') = 2 \(x - a) ; whence the proposition.
Under the conditions of Proposition 1, the point * defined by

x — a = zL, \(x^ — a)

iel K '

(resp. the free vector 2 \(x t - a) J is denoted by 2 X t x t .

Thus in particular the notation b — a introduced in no. 1 is recovered.
When 2 X. = 1, the point * = 2, X t # t is called the barycentre of the points x^
given the masses \.

Given m points a 1} . . .,a m of E, whose number m is not a multiple of the

m i
characteristic of K (V, § 1), the point g = .Z - a t is called (by an abuse of



326



AFFINE LINEAR VARIETIES § 9.3

language) the barycentre of the points a t (1 &lt; t &lt; m) (for m = 2, we say
"midpoint" instead of "barycentre"); it is characterized by the relation



2 (a, - g) = 0.



3. AFFINE LINEAR VARIETIES

Definition 2. Given an qffine space E, a subset V of E is called an qffine linear
variety (or simply a /mear variety or an o$n£ rafaif of E) if , for every family (x l ) leI
of points ofV and every family (X t )iei of elements ofK. of finite support such that

2i \= lithe barycentre 2* \x t belongs to V.

It amounts to the same to say that the condition of Definition 2 holds for
every finite family of points of V.

The empty set is a linear variety; every intersection of linear varieties is a
linear variety.

Let V be a non-empty subset of E and a a point of V; the relation

n

x — a = 2, \{x % — a)

n / n \

means that * is a barycentre Z, Xj*, + 1 1 — 2, 7^ J a of the family consisting
of the x t and a. Therefore:

Proposition 2. For a non-empty subset V of an qffine space E to be a linear variety,
it is necessary and sufficient that V be a vector subspacefor the vector space structure on
E obtained by taking a point ofVas origin.

In particular, the non-empty affine linear varieties of a vector space T
(considered as an affine space) are just the translates of the vector subspaces
of T; the vector subspaces of T are therefore the linear varieties containing 0.

Let V be a non-empty linear variety of the affine space E; the set of free
vectors x — y, where x and y run through V, is a vector subspace D of the
translation space T of E called the direction of V: for, if a e V, then

x -y = (x - a) - (y - a)

and our assertion follows from Proposition 2. It is immediate that D operates
faithfully and transitively on V, which therefore has canonically the structure
of an affine space attached to D. By the dimension of the affine variety V, we mean
the dimension of V with this affine space structure, that is the dimension of
the vector space D. The linear varieties of dimension are the points of E;
those of dimension 1 (resp. 2) are called lines (resp. planes) of E.

327



LINEAR ALGEBRA



Every vector ^ belonging to the direction of a line is called a direction
vector of this line; its components with respect to a basis of T form what is
called a system of direction parameters of the line in question.

The codimension of a linear variety V in E is the codimension of its direction
D in T; a linear variety of codimension 1 in E is called an (affine) hyperplane
ofE.

Two linear varieties with the same direction are called parallel; it amounts
to the same to say that one is derived from the other by translation. If V is a
linear variety in T (considered as an affine space), its direction is the linear
variety parallel to V and containing 0.

Proposition 3. Given a family (a t )tei of points of an affine space E, the set V of

bary centres 2, \a t ( (X t ) of finite support, 2-, \ = I J is a linear variety ofE.

If the family (a t ) is empty, then V = because of the condition 2* \ = 1 .
It may therefore be assumed that the family (a t ) is non-empty and in this
case the proposition is obvious, taking one of the a i as origin in E.

The variety V is obviously the smallest linear variety containing the a t ;
it is said to be generated by the family (a t ) and this family is called a generating
system of V.

In the notation of Proposition 3, assuming the family (a t ) is non-empty,

for the expression for every point xeVin the form x = 2* X t a t to be unique,

it is necessary and sufficient that, denoting an arbitrary index of I by K, the
family of vectors a l — a K , where t runs through the set of indices #k, be free
in T. Then the family (a v ) iel of points ofE is said to be qffinely free (or that
its elements form an qffinely free system, or are qffinely independent) and that X t
is the barycentric coordinate of x of index t, with respect to the affinely free family

K).

A family (a t ) te i of points of E which is not affinely free is said to be qffinely
related.

Proposition 4. For a non-empty family (fl t ) te i of points in an affine space E to be
qffinely related, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist a family (X t ) ieI of elements

not all zero in K, of finite support, such that 2-, \ — and 2^ \a x = 0.

Given an index k e I, to say that the family of vectors (a t — a K ), where i
runs through the set of indices t^k, is related in T, means that there exists a

'family of scalars (X t ) t?tK not all zero such that 2L, \(a t — a K ) = 0, which may
also be written Z* \a. = 0, with X K = — 2, \, in other words 2, X, = 0.

iel i*k tel

328



AFFINE LINEAR MAPPINGS § 9.4

Proposition 5. For a non-empty family {a t ) ieI of points of an affine space E to be
affinelyfree, it is necessary and sufficient that, for every index k e I, a K do not belong to
the linear variety generated by the &lt;z t of index #k.

The proposition is obvious if I has only a single element. Otherwise, taking
as origin in E one of the a K of index #k, the proposition follows from § 7, no.
1, Remark.

4. AFFINE LINEAR MAPPINGS

Definition 3. Given two affine spaces E, E' attached to two vector spaces T, T'
over the same field K, a mapping uofE into E' is called an affine linear mapping (or an
affine mapping) if, for every family (# t ) ieI of points ofE and every family (\) iel such

that 2- X. = 1.
iel l '

(3) u\ 2, \x\ = Z \ttfo).

\iel / iel

Proposition 6. Let u be an affine mapping of E into E'. There exists one and only
one linear mapping vofT into T' such that

u(x + t) = u(x) + v(t)

for all x e E, t e T.

Let a be any point of E. The mapping

t h-». u{a + t) — u{a)
is a linear mapping v a of T into T', for we may write

a + Xt = X(« + t) + (1 - X)a

a + s + t = (a + s) + (a + t) — a

and it follows from (3) that f a (Xt) = Xy a (t) and v a (s + t) = v a (s) + v a (t).
Moreover, if b is another point of E, then v a = v b ; for the relation

(a + t)-a + b = b + t
implies

u(a + t) - u(a) + u(b) = u(b + t)

that is u(a + t) — u{a) = u(b + t) — u(b). Whence the existence of v; the
uniqueness is immediate.

v is called the linear mapping of T into T' associated with u. Conversely,
for every linear mapping v of T into T' and every ordered pair of points
aeE, a' e E', it is immediately verified that

x i-&gt; a' + v(x — a)

329



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

is an affine mapping of E into E' whose associated linear mapping is v. To
say that u is an affine mapping of E into E' therefore also means that, if an
arbitrary point a in E and the point u(a) in E' are taken as origins, u is a
linear mapping for the two vector spaces thus obtained.

Let E" be a third affine space, T* its translation space, u' an affine mapping
of E' into E" and v' the linear mapping of T" into T" associated with u'.
Clearly u' °u is an affine mapping of E into E"; moreover, for a e E and
teT,

u'{u(a + t)) = u'{u(a) + v(t)) = u'{u(a)) + v'(v(t))

and hence v' ° v is the linear mapping of T into T" associated with u' ° u.
For an affine mapping u to be bijective, it is necessary and sufficient that the
associated linear mapping v be so, and u' 1 is then an affine mapping whose
associated linear mapping is o -1 .

In particular, the affine bijections of E onto itself form a group G, called
the affine group of E. The mapping which associates with ueG the linear
mapping v associated with u is, by the above, a homomorphism of G onto the
linear group GL(T). If u is a translation, v is the identity and conversely.
Hence, the kernel of the above homomorphism is the translation group T
of E which is therefore a normal subgroup of G.

If u e G, the automorphism 1 \-&gt; utu' 1 of T (where t is identified with the
translation x i-&gt; x + t) is the linear mapping v associated with u. For *eE and
1 6 T, by definition

x + utu- 1 = u{u~ x {x) + t) = m(m _1 (*)) + v(t) = x + v(t)

and hence utu' 1 = v(t).

Let a e E and G be the subgroup of G consisting of the ueG such that
u(a) = a. If E is identified with T by taking a as origin, G a is identified with
GL(T). Every ueG can be expressed uniquely in the form u = t^j (resp.
in the form u = u 2 t 2 ), where m 1} u 2 are in G a and t l5 t 2 in T: for, writing
t x = u{a) — a, M _1 t 1 g G a , whence the existence of u x and t x \ the existence
of u 2 and t 2 is obtained analogously. The uniqueness follows from the fact
that G a n T reduces to the identity element of G. Moreover

*i«i = «i(«i _1 ti"i)

whence u 2 = u 1} t 2 = u^t^u^. Finally, the linear mappings associated with
u and u x are the same and hence, if as above G a is identified with GL(T),
u x is the linear mapping from T to itself associated with u. It is thus seen that
G is the semi-direct product of G a by T (I, § 6, no. 1).

Let E, E' be two affine spaces over K. The direct (resp. inverse) image
of a linear variety of E (resp. E') under an affine mapping u of E into E' is a
linear variety of E' (resp. E) ; the rank of u is by definition the dimension of
«(E) ; it is equal to the rank of the linear mapping associated with u. If V, V
are linear varieties of the same finite dimension m in E, E' respectively, there

330



DEFINITION OF PROJECTIVE SPACES § 9.5

exists an affine mapping u of E into E' such that m(V) = V: taking as
origins in E and E' points of V and V respectively, then taking in E (resp. E')
a basis whose first m vectors form a basis of V (resp. V), the proposition
follows immediately from § 1, no. 11, Corollary 3 to Proposition 17.

As the field K has canonically a left vector space structure (of dimension 1)
over K, it can be considered as an affine space of dimension 1. An affine
mapping of an affine space D (over K) into the affine space K is also called
an affine linear function (or an affine function) . If a point a is taken as origin in E,
every affine function on E can then be written uniquely as xt-xx. + v(x),
where a e K and v is a linear form on the vector space E thus obtained ; the
affine functions on E therefore form a right vector space over K of dimension
1 + dim E. If m is a non-constant affine function on E and X e K, the set of
x £ E satisfying the equation u(x) = X is a hyperplane; conversely, for every

hyperplane H in E, there exists an affine function u Q on E such that H = u Q (0)

and every affine function u such that H = u (0) is of the form m (jl, where
(xeK (§7, no. 5, Proposition 11). If u is an affine function on E, the
hyperplanes with equations u(x) = a and u(x) = p are parallel.

5. DEFINITION OF PROJECTIVE SPACES

Definition 4. Given a left (resp. right) vector space V over afield K, the left (resp.
right) projective space derived from V, denoted by P(V), is the quotient of the comple-
ment V — {0} of{0} in V by the equivalence relation A(V) "there exists X ^ in K
such that y = X# (resp. y = #X) between x and y in V — {0}.

When V = K» +1 , we also write P n (K) instead of P(K s n+1 ) and A n (K)
instead of A(V).

Definition 4 can also be expressed by saying that P(V) is the set of lines
(passing through 0) in V with the origin removed; P(V) is therefore canonic-
ally identified with the set of lines (passing through 0) in V. The elements of
a projective space are called the points of that space.

When V is of dimension n, the integer n — 1 is called the dimension of the
projective space P(V) if n is finite, and the cardinal n otherwise; this cardinal
is denoted by dim K P(V) or dimP(V). Thus a projective space of dimension
— 1 is empty and a projective space of dimension is a single point. A pro-
jective space of dimension 1 (resp. 2) is called a projective line (resp. projective
plane) .

Henceforth we shall only consider left projective spaces.

6. HOMOGENEOUS COORDINATES

Let V be a vector space of finite dimension n + 1 over K, P(V) the projective
space of dimension n derived from V and (£ 4 )o«i&lt;n a basis of V. Let 7t denote
the canonical mapping of V — {0} onto the quotient set P(V). For every

331



LINEAR ALGEBRA



point x = 2-, %,&amp; of V — {0}, (£o&gt; £i&gt; • • -j ?n) is called a system of homogeneous

coordinates of the point n(x) with respect to the basis (e t ) of V. Every system
(£ t ) of n + 1 elements not all zero of K is therefore a system of homogeneous
coordinates of a point of P(V) with respect to (e t ) ; for two such systems
(%i), (£{) to be systems of homogeneous coordinates of the same point of
P(V) with respect to the same basis (e t ), it is necessary and sufficient that there
exists an element X # of K. such that £{ = X£j for &lt; i &lt; «.

This definition is immediately generalized to the case where V is infinite-
dimensional.



Given another basis (e t ) of V such that e t = 2, OLtfj (0 ^ i &lt; n) and a
system (£j) of homogeneous coordinates of 7r(#) with respect to the basis
(e^, for a system (| f ) of n + 1 elements of K to be a system of homogeneous
coordinates of t:(x) with respect to the basis (e 4 ), it is necessary and sufficient
that there exist X # in K such that

n

xl { = 2, Zjctji for ^ z &lt; n.
In particular, if *, = y^ with Yi # (0 &lt; z" ^ n), then £, = [i^ where

7. PROJECTIVE LINEAR VARIETIES

Let W be a vector subspace of a vector space V; the canonical image of
W — {0} in the projective space P(V) derived from V is called a projective
linear variety (or simply a linear variety when no confusion is to be feared) ; as
the equivalence relation A(W) on W — {0} is induced by the relation A(V),
the projective linear variety the image of W — {0} in P(V) can be identified
with the projective space P(W) derived from W and hence we may speak
of the dimension of such a variety. In a projective space P(V), the canonical
image of a hyperplane (with the origin removed) of V is a linear variety called
a projective hyperplane (or simply a hyperplane); if P(V) is of finite dimension n
the hyperplanes in P(V) are the linear varieties of dimension n — 1.

Every proposition concerning vector subspaces of a vector space goes over
to a proposition concerning projective linear varieties. For example, if a
projective space P(V) is of finite dimension n and (^)o&lt;i&lt;n is a basis of V,
every linear variety L &lt;= P(V) of dimension r can be defined by a system of
n — r homogeneous linear equations

n

(4) 2^ = (l^j^n-r)

332



PROJECTIVE COMPLETION OF AN AFFINE SPACE § 9.8

between the homogeneous coordinates £ f (0 ^ i ^ n) of a point of P(V)
with respect to the basis (e t ), the left hand sides of (4) being linearly independent
forms on V. In particular, a projective hyperplane is defined by a single
homogeneous linear equation with coefficients not all zero. Conversely, the
points of P(V) satisfying an arbitrary system of homogeneous linear equations
with respect to the £ { form a linear variety L; if the system considered consists
of k ^ n + 1 equations, L is of dimension ^ w — k.

Every intersection of linear varieties of P(V) is a linear variety; for every
subset A of P(V), there exists a smallest linear variety L containing A; it
is called the linear variety generated by A and A is called a generating system of L.

If W is the vector subspace of V generated by u (A), then L = P(W).

If L and M are any two linear varieties in P(V) and N the variety generated
by L U M, then (§ 7, no. 3, Corollary 3 to Proposition 4)

(5) dim L + dim M = dim(L n M) + dim N.

In particular, if P(V) is finite-dimensional and dim L + dim M ^ dim P(V),
it follows from (5) that LnMis non-empty.

Let (# t ), (y t ) be two families of points in the vector space V with the same
indexing set, such that y t = \x l} where X; ^ for all i. If the family (x t ) is
free, so is (y t ) and conversely; then it is said that the family of points tc^)
of P(V) is protectively free (or simply free). It amounts to the same to say that
for every index k, the point 7r(# K ) does not belong to the linear variety gener-
ated by the tz(x 1 ) for i ^ k. A family of points of P(V) which is not projectively
free is called projectively related (or simply related).

For a family (a\) of points of V — {0} to be such that the family (7c (x t ))
is projectively free and generates P(V), it is necessary and sufficient that
(x t ) be a basis of V. If P(V) is of dimension n the number of elements in such
a family is therefore n + 1. Note that giving such a family (71 (x t )) in P(V)
does not determine (even to within a left factor) the homogeneous coordi-
nates of a given point of P(V) with respect to a basis (# t ) of V such that
Tu(y t ) = Tcfo) for all 1 (cf. no. 6).

8. PROJECTIVE COMPLETION OF AN AFFINE SPACE

Let V be a (left) vector space over a field K and consider the vector space
K s x V over K; the projective space P(K S x V) is called the projective
space canonically associated with the vector space V. If V is of dimension n,
P(K S x V) is of the same dimension n. Consider in K s x V the affine hyper-
plane Vi = {1} x V, whose direction (no. 3) is the subspace V = {0} x V;
if a line (passing through 0) of K s x V is not contained in V , it contains a
point (a, x) with a ^ and x e V, hence it contains also the point
a -1 (oc, x) = (l,a _1 x) of V x ; the converse is immediate and it is seen that
there is a one-to-one correspondence between the points of V ± and the

333



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

lines (passing through 0) of K s x V not contained in V , each of the latter
meeting V x in one and only one point. It follows that the mapping
x i-&gt;&lt;j&gt; (#) = 7t(1,a:) is an injection (called canonical) of V into the projective
space P(K S x V); Vis often identified with its image under this injection.
The complement of &lt;J&gt;(V) in P(K S x V) is the projective hyperplane P(V )
called the hyperplane at infinity of P(K S x V) (or of V, by an abuse of language) ;
its points are also called the "points at infinity" of P(K S x V) (or of V).
If (a t ) is a basis of V and in K s x V the basis is taken consisting of the ele-
ments e t = (0, &lt;2 t ) and the element e a = (1,0), the points at infinity in
P(K S x V) are those whose homogeneous coordinate of index &lt;o is 0.

Let M be an affine linear variety in V (no. 3) and D its direction; the canoni-
cal image &lt;|&gt;(M) of M in P(K S x V) is contained in the canonical image
M = tc(M 2 ) of the vector subspace M 2 of K s x V generated by the affine
variety M x = {1} x M of K s x V. More precisely, if (a t ) is an affinely
free system of M generating M, the elements (1, fl t ) form a basis of M 2 and
therefore M is just the projective linear variety generated by &lt;j&gt;(M) ; if M is finite-
dimensional, M has the same dimension as M. The complement of &lt;j&gt;(M)
in M is the intersection of M and the hyperplane at infinity and is equal to
the canonical image w(M ), where M = {0} x D.

Conversely, let N be a projective linear variety not contained in the hyper-
plane at infinity and let R = n (N) ; R n Vj is an affine linear variety of
K x V of the form {1} x M, where M is an affine linear variety of V and
it is immediately seen that N is the affine linear variety M generated by

There is therefore a one-to-one correspondence between the affine linear
varieties of V and the projective linear varieties of P(K S x V) not contained
in the hyperplane at infinity; for two affine linear varieties of V to be parallel,
it is necessary and sufficient that the projective linear varieties which they
generate have the same intersection with the hyperplane at infinity (which
is sometimes expressed by saying that the two affine linear varieties in ques-
tion have the same points at infinity).

9. EXTENSION OF RATIONAL FUNCTIONS

If the results of no. 8 are applied to the vector space V = K s of dimension 1,
it is seen that there exists a canonical injection &lt;j&gt; of K s into the projective
line Pi(K) = P(K S x K s ) ; for all \ e K, $(£) is the point with homogeneous
coordinates (1,5) with respect to the canonical basis (§ 1, no. 11) of K s x K s .
The complement of $(K) in Pi(K) consists of the single point with homo-
geneous coordinates (0, 1) with respect to the above basis; it is called the
"point at infinity". Pi(K) is also called the projective field associated with
K and denoted by &amp;, the point at infinity in K. being denoted by oo.

♦Consider in particular the case where K is a commutative field and let

334



PROJECTIVE LINEAR MAPPINGS § 9.10

fe K(X) be a rational function in one indeterminate over K (IV, § 4) ; if
f^O, there is a unique expression/ = &lt;xp/q, where a e K* andp and q are two
relatively prime monic polynomials (VII, § 1) ; let m and n be their respective
degrees and let r == sup(m, n). We write

p x {T, X) = T'/&gt;(X/T), fc(T, X) = T^X/T) ;

/&gt;! and q x are two homogeneous polynomials of degree r over K such that
p(X) = /^(l, X), q(X) = ^(l, X). Hence, for every element £ eK which is
not a zero of y(X),/(£) = ap(Qlq(^) is defined and we may write

/(*) = 0^(1, ?)/ft(l, 5) = aA(X, X5)/fr(X, X?)
for all X 7^ in K. Consider then the mapping

of K 2 into itself; it is compatible with the equivalence relation A(K 2 ) and
therefore defines, when passing to the quotients, a mapping/ of K into itself
which coincides with £ &gt;-&gt;/(£) at the points where this rational function is
defined; it is said, by an abuse of language, that /is the canonical extension of
/toft.

For example, if/ = 1/X, then/(0) = oo and/(oo) = 0; if

/= (aX + b)/(cX + d)

with ad - be ^ 0, then f{-djc) = oo, /(oo) = a/c if c jt 0, /(oo) = oo if
c = 0. If / = a X n + • • • + a n is a polynomial of degree n &gt; 0, then
/(oo) = 00.*

10. PROJECTIVE LINEAR MAPPINGS

Let V, V be two left vector spaces over a field K, / a linear mapping of V

into V and N = /(0) its kernel. It is immediate that the image under /
of a line (passing through 0) in V not contained in N is a line (passing through
0) in V; hence, on passing to the quotients, / defines a mapping g of
P(V) — P(N) into P(V'). Such a mapping is called a projective linear mapping
(or, simply, a. projective mapping); although it is defined on P(V) — P(N) and
not on P(V) (when N # {0}), we shall say by an abuse of language that g is a
projective mapping of P(V) into P(V'). The projective linear variety P(N),
where g is not defined, is called the centre of g.

Note that, when g is defined on the whole of P(V) (that is when N = {0}),
g is an injection of P(V) into P(V).

When bases (a„) Xeli , (b u ) ueM are given in V and V respectively, a projec-
tive mapping of P(V) into P(V') maps a point of P(V) with homogeneous

335



LINEAR ALGEBRA



coordinates ^ (X e L) to a point of P(V') with a system of homogeneous
coordinates t^ ([i e M) of the form

(6) v)n = 2, ^oc Xu (a^eK).

A6Jj

The centre of g is the linear variety defined by the equations
2^a Xll = (jxeM).

If G is the centre of g and M is a linear variety of P(V), the image under
g of M — (M n C) is a linear variety of P(V') denoted (by an abuse of
language) byg(M). Then

(7) dim^(M) + dim(M n C) + 1 = dimM

(§ 7, no. 4, formula (12)). If M' is a linear variety of P(V'), ^(M') U G
is a linear variety of P(V) and

(8) dim(^(M') u C) = dim C + dim(M' n *(P(V))) + 1.

It is said, by an abuse of language, that g (M') u C is the inverse image of
M' under g.

As the values taken by a linear mapping on a basis (*,) of V can be chosen
arbitrarily in V, it is seen that there exists a projective linear mapping of
P(V) into P(V') taking arbitrary values at the points Tc(&lt;? t ). But (even when g
is everywhere defined) giving gfafo)) does not determine g uniquely (Exer-
cise 10).

The composition of two projective mappings which are bijections is a
projective mapping; so is the inverse mapping of such a bijection. The bijec-
tive projective mappings of a projective space P(V) onto itself thus form a
group, called the projective group of P(V) and denoted by PGL(V); we write
PGL n (K) or PGL(rc, K) instead of PGL(K s n ).

Remark. In a projective space P(V) over a field K, let H = P(W) be a
hyperplane. There exists a bijective linear mapping / of V onto K s x W
such that/(W) = W; let g be the projective mapping obtained from/
by passing to the quotients. It has been seen (no. 8) that the complement of
P(W)inP(K s x W) can be identified with an affine space whose translation
space is W. When P(V) is identified with P(K S x W) by means of g, it is
said that H has been taken as hyperplane at infinity in P(V) ; the complement of
H in P(V) is then identified with an affine space whose translation space is
W.

336



PROJECTIVE SPACE STRUCTURE § 9.1 1

11. PROJECTIVE SPACE STRUCTURE

Given a set E and a field K, a (left) projective space structure on E with respect
to the field K is defined by giving a non-empty set O of bisections of subsets of the
projective space P(K.£ E ) onto E satisfying the following axioms :

(EP X ) The set of definition of every mapping fe &lt;b is a linear variety ofPCK.™).
(EP n ) For every ordered pair of elements f, g of O defined respectively on the linear

varieties P(V) and P(W), the bijection h = g ° f of P(V) onto P(W) is a pro-
jective mapping.

(EPm) Conversely, if fe O is defined on the linear variety P(V) and h is a
bijective projective mapping of P(V) onto a linear variety P(W) &lt;=■ P(Kg E) ), then

Let E be a set, (V x ) XsL a family of vector spaces over K and suppose given
for each X e L a bijection f k of P(V^) onto E such that, for every ordered pair

of indices X, \i t f k of^ is a projective mapping of P(V W ) onto P(V X ). Then we can
define on E a projective space structure with respect to K as follows: let
(&lt;? t ) teI be a basis of a space V\ and write a t = fi(iz(e % )) ; let b^ be the element
of index a, in the canonical basis of Kg E) (§ 1, no. 11). The relation i # k
implies 6 t # b K because of the hypothesis that f K is bijective; hence the b t
form a basis of a vector subspace W of Kg E) and there therefore exists a
bijective projective mapping h of P(W ) onto P(V„) such that A(7c(£ t )) = 7r(* t )
for all i e I. If O is taken to be the set of all bijective projective mappings
f K o h o g -1 , where g runs through the set of all bijective projective mappings
P(W) cz P(K&lt; E) ), it is immediately verified that O satisfies axioms (EP^,
(EP IX ) and (EP in ). It is moreover immediate that O depends neither on the
choice of index X e L, nor on the choice of basis fo) in V\, nor on the choice
of A.

In particular (taking L to consist of a single element), every projective
space P(V) derived from a vector space V (no. 5, Definition 4) thus has a
well determined "projective space structure" in the sense of the definition
given in this no. Hence any set with a projective space structure can be
called a projective space.

With the same notation, a linear variety in a projective space E is a subset
M of E such that, for at least one bijection fe O defined on P(V) &lt;= P(Kg E) ),

f(M) is a linear variety in P(V) in the sense of no. 7 (this property then holds
for allfe O). It follows from the above that every linear variety in a projective
space has canonically a projective space structure.

A projective space E is said to be of dimension n if, for all /eO, /(E)
is a linear variety of dimension n (it suffices that this hold for one mapping
/eO).

337



LINEAR ALGEBRA



§ 10. MATRICES

1. DEFINITION OF MATRICES

Definition 1. Let I, K, H be three sets; a matrix of type (I, K) with elements in
H (or a matrix of type (I, K) over H) is any family M = (m lK ) iltK)eIxK of elements
ofVL whose indexing set is the product I x K. For all i e I, the family (m lK ) KeK is
called the row of M of index i; for all K e K, the family (m lK ) ieI is called the column
of M of index K.

If I (resp. K) is finite, M is said to be a matrix with a finite number of rows
(resp. columns). The set of matrices of type (I, K) over H is identified with
the product H 1 * K .

The names "row" and "column" arise from the fact that, in the case
where I and K are intervals (1, p), (1, q) of N, the elements of the matrix
are envisaged as set out in a rectangular array with p rows (arranged
horizontally) and q columns (arranged vertically) :

f m lx m 12 • . . tn lq

1712X Wl 2 2 • • • m 2q



^m pl m p2 ... m v



When p and q are explicit integers sufficiently small for it to be prac-
ticable, it is a convention that the above array is a symbol effectively denot-
ing the matrix in question ; this notation enables us to dispense with the use
of indices, it being understood that the indices of an element are deter-
mined by its place in the array; for example, when we speak of the matrix



(a b c\
d e f)



we mean the matrix (m w ) 1&lt;1&lt;2 , i&lt;t&lt;z suc b that

»n = a, m x2 = b&gt; ™iz = c &gt; m 2\ = d, m 22 = e, m 23 = f.

Instead of matrix of type ((l,/&gt;), (1, ?)), we also say matrix of type
(p, q), or matrix with p rows and q columns, if no confusion arises; the set of
matrices of type (p, q) over H is sometimes denoted by M P&gt;9 (H).

Every matrix over H for which one of the indexing sets I, K is empty
is identical with the empty family of elements of H; it is also called the
empty matrix. When I = {i } (resp. K = {k }) is a set consisting of a single
element, M is called a row matrix (resp. column matrix) and the row (resp.
column) index can then be suppressed in the notation; when I and K
are both sets with one element, a matrix of type (I, K) is often identified
with the unique element in this matrix.



338



MATRICES OVER A COMMUTATIVE GROUP § 10.2

A subfamily M' = (m lK ) (ltK)eJxlj of a matrix M = (w tK ) (tK)eIxK , whose
indexing set is the product of a subset J of I and a subset L of K, is called a
submatrix of the matrix M ; it is said to be obtained by suppressing in M the
rows of index i $J and the columns of index k ^ L; conversely, M is said to
be obtained by bordering M' with the rows of index t ^ J and the columns of
index k ^ L.

Definition 2. The transpose of a matrix M = (m lK ) (lfK)e i xK , denoted by l M, is
the matrix (ml tl ) (Ktt)eKxI over H given by m' Kl = m iK for all (t, k) e K x L.

It follows from this definition that the transpose of a matrix of type (I, K)
is a matrix of type (K, I) and that

(1) ^M) = M.

2. MATRICES OVER A COMMUTATIVE GROUP

Let G be a commutative group (written additively) . The set of matrices over
G, with the given indexing sets I, K, has a commutative group structure since it
is the set of mappings from I x KtoG; this group is written additively, so
that if M = (m tK ) and M' = (m' lK ) are two of its elements, then

M + M' = (m tK + m' lK ) ;

the identity element of this group is therefore the matrix all of whose elements
are zero (called the zero matrix). Clearly

(2) \M + M') = % M + l M'.

The sum of two matrices is thus only defined if the indexing sets of the
rows and the columns are the same for the two matrices.

Let H', H* be two sets, G a commutative group (written additively) and
/: (h', h") h&gt; h'h" a mapping from H' x H" to G. Given two matrices

M = \ m ik) (i, k) el y.Ki M." = (m^i) (kl)eKxIj

over H' and H" respectively such that the indexing set K of the columns of
M' is finite and equal to the indexing set of the rows of M", the product of M'
and M" viaf denoted by M'M" or /(AT, M" ), is the matrix



&lt; 3 &gt; (1^&lt;1,^



over G.



The above definition supposes that the indexing set of the columns of
M' is equal to the indexing set of the rows of M" ; in particular the product
M"M' has no meaning if I j± L,. In formula (3) the elements of the same

339



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

row of M' figure multiplied on the right by the elements of the same column
of M"; the multiplication is said to be made "rows by columns".

Let/ be the mapping (h", h') &gt;-*■ h'h" of H" x H' to G; it follows immedi-
ately from the definitions that

(4) «(Af'M") = t M". i M'

where the product on the left (resp. right) hand side is calculated via/ (resp.
via/ ).

When H' and H" are themselves commutative groups (written additively)
and /is Z-bilinear (§ 3, no. 1), the distributivity formulae

({M' + N')M" = M'M" + N'M"
{&gt; \M'{M" + N") = M'M" + M'N"

are immediately verified, the indexing sets being such that the sums and pro-
ducts appearing are defined.

Now let H 1} H 2 , H 3 , H 12 , H 23 and H be commutative groups (written addi-
tively),/^:^ x H 2 -&gt;H 125 / 23 :H 2 x H 3 -&gt; H 23 mappings and

/ 3 :H 12 x H 3 -&gt;H, yi-.Hi x H 23 ^H

Z-bilinear mappings; suppose further that, for all x t e H 4 (t = 1, 2, 3)

fail X2\ x li X 21&gt; ^3) = Jl( X l&gt;f23\ X 2&gt; X 3))

(which may also be written as above (x 1 x 2 )x 3 = x^x^x^)) ; then, if M' = (wzj 8 )&gt;
M" = (m" t ), M m = (m? u ) are matrices over H l5 H 2 , H 3 respectively,

(6) (M'M")M m = M'{M"M m )

when the products on the two sides (calculated respectively via / 12 , / 3 , / 23
and/) are defined; for

2 (2 m' rs m'st)mt u = 22 KXt)"&amp; = 22 »&amp;(m&gt;£,)

t \ S I t S St

= Z "4 (2 m'sfmtuj

by virtue of the hypotheses made.

The two sides of (6) are also denoted by M'M"M m . Analogous conventions
are made for products of more than three factors.

Remark. The above formulae extend to a more general situation. To be pre-
cise:

(a) Suppose H = U G tK where each G lK is a commutative group
written additively; then the sum M + M' may be defined when, for each
ordered pair (1, k), m lK 6 G tK and m[ K e Gi K .

340



MATRICES OVER A RING § 10.3

(b) Let I, K, L be three sets with K assumed finite and let H' = U H t ' fc ,
H" = U Hfc,, H = U H„ be three sets; suppose that each H u
is a commutative group written additively and for each triple (i, k, I) let

ftki '• Hit x H fc i — *- H u

be a mapping. Then if M' = {m' ik ) (itk)eIxK , M" = {m" kl ) (Kl)eKxh are matrices
such that m' ik e H' ik and m" kl g HJ, for all i, k, I we can define the product
M'M" via the/ iW . We leave to the reader the task of writing down and proving
the formulae analogous to (4), (5) and (6).

3. MATRICES OVER A RING

The most important matrices in Mathematics are matrices over a ring A.
The set A 1 x K of matrices over A corresponding to indexing sets I, K then has
canonically an (A, A)-bimodule structure (§ 1, no. 14).

For every ordered pair (i, k) e I x K, let E ik be the matrix (a,,) such that
a ik = 1 and a n = for (j, I) =£ (i, k) ; the E ik are called the matrix units in
the set of matrices A IxK ; if I and K are finite, they form the canonical basis
of this set for its left or right A-module structure (§ 1, no. 11). Clearly

%k = E ki-

Unless otherwise mentioned, the product M'M" of two matrices over A
(assumed to be denned) will always be understood to be relative to the
multiplication (x,y) \-&gt; xy in A (or, as is also said, will be "calculated in A").
Then we have (no. 2) the associativity and distributivity formulae

(7) (XY)Z = X{YZ)

(X{Y +Z)=XY + XZ
w \(X + Y)Z = XZ+ YZ

for three matrices X, Y, Z over A, whenever the sums and products appear-
ing in these formulae are defined.

In particular, if E ik (resp. E kl , E^) are the matrix units in A 1 x K (resp.
A KxL , A IxL ) respectively, with I = (l,/&gt;), K = (1, q], L = (1, r), we obtain
the formulae

(9) i EikE; r°„ liklLj

Let A be the opposite ring of A and let a * b ( = ba) denote the product of
a and b in A ; then, for two matrices X, Y over A whose product is defined,

(10) \XY) =*Y**X

341



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

where on the right hand side l Y and *X are considered as matrices with ele-
ments in A ; when A is commutative, then

(11) KXY) = *Y.*X

Proposition 1. Let A, B be two rings and M = (m ik ) (itk)eIxK and

M' = (?%&lt;;)({, JflelxK

two matrices with finite indexing sets over an (A,B)-bimodule G. Suppose that for
every matrix unit L = (a t ) ieI with one row and elements in A and every matrix unit
C = (b k ) keK with one column and elements in B, L.M.C — L.M'.C (the products
being calculated via the external laws of the (A, B)-module G) ; then M = M'.

If Z. is taken to be the matrix unit (a 8 ) with a K = 1, a s = for s # t, and C
the matrix unit (b t ) with b k = 1, b t = for t # k, the products L.M.C and
L.M'.C arc matrices with a single element respectively equal to m ik and m' ik .

Let A, B be two rings and cr: A -&gt; B a homomorphism.

For every matrix M = (m tK ) over A, we shall denote by o(M) the matrix
(c(m lK )) over B; clearly &lt;s(aM) = c(a)a(M), a(Ma) = &lt;s{M)a(a) for aeA,
also o^M) = *(a(M)) and

MM + M') = a{M) + a(M')
W \ c{MM') = g(M)g(M')

when the operations considered are denned, the products on the left and right
hand sides of (12) being calculated in A and B respectively. When a is denoted
by x y-&gt; x a , we write M a instead of cr(M).

Consider in particular an anti-endomorphism a of A, that is a homomorphism
of A to the opposite ring A , or a mapping of A into itself such that

a (a + a') = a (a) + o{a'), o(flfl') = a(a')a(a)

for all a, a' in A; then, for two matrices M, M' over A whose product MM'
is defined,

(13) a(MM') = »(&lt;r('M') .&lt;t('M))

where the products on the two sides are calculated in A; this follows immedi-
ately from (10) and (12).

4. MATRICES AND LINEAR MAPPINGS

Let A be a ring and E a (right or left) A-module admitting a basis (* 4 ) l6l .
For every element *gE, the matrix of x with respect to the basis (e^, denoted by
M(x) or x (or sometimes simply x when no confusion can arise), is the column
matrix consisting of the components x t (t'el) of x with respect to («,) (§ 1,
no. 11); in calculations it will sometimes be convenient, in order to re-

342



MATRICES AND LINEAR MAPPINGS § 10.4

member that the index i is a row index, to adjoin to it a column index
taking only one value and write the matrix M(x) as (x l0 ).

We now consider two (left or right) A-modules E and F with bases (^) i6I
and C/fc)fceK respectively ; let {/*) be the family of coordinate forms corresponding
to (f k ). For a linear mapping u of E into F, we shall define the matrix ofu with
respect to the bases (« { ), (f k ) in each of the following cases:

(D) E and F are right A-modules, u is A-linear.
(G) E and F are left A-modules, u is A-linear.

In what follows, we shall attach the letter (D) (resp. (G)) to formulae
applying to right (resp. left) modules.

Definition 3. In each of the above two cases, the matrix of u with respect to the
bases (&lt;?,), (f k ) is the matrix M(u) = (u M ) iktt)eK ^ x such that

(14) u ki =/,*(«(*())
which is written respectively as

(14 D) u ki = &lt;ftu(e i )y

(14 G) ««-&lt;«(«) J?&gt;.

The column of M (w) of index i is therefore equal to M(u(e t )).

Clearly if u, v are two linear mappings of E into F and M(u), M(v) their
matrices with respect to the same bases, then

(15) M(u + v) = M(u) + M(v)
and

(16) Mfru) = yM(u)

for every element y of the centre T of A. In other words, once the bases (e t ),
(f k ) are fixed, the mapping u i-&gt; M (u) is a Y -module isomorphism of Hom A (E, F)
onto a subset of the set A KxI , equal to A KxI if K is finite.

Proposition 2. Suppose I and K are finite. For every element x e E, the matrix
M(u(x)) with respect to the basis (f k ) is given by the formula

(17 D) M{u(x)) = M{u) .M{x)

(17 G) 'Af («(*)) = *M(x) }M («).

We verify for example (17 G). Let x = Z x i0 e t , u(x) =Zy k0 f k with
*i&lt;&gt;eA, y k0 eA; then u(x) = u[2&lt; x^eA = 2,%)^) = 2, x i0 u ki f k ; whence

343



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

y k0 = 2-, x iQ u ki . In order to bring the two indices i along side one another, we
consider the transpose matrices t M(x) = (x' 0i ), where x' 0i = x i0 and

*M{u) = {u' ik ),

where u' ik = u kl ; then y kQ = 2L, x' 0i u' ik and the right hand side is the element
of index A; of the matrix with one row t M(x) MM^), whence (17 G).

When A is commutative, ( 1 7 G) reduces to ( 1 7 D) by formula (4) of
no. 2.

Corollary. Let E, F, G be three right (resp. left) modules over a ring A, (^) l6 i,
C/fc)fceK&gt; (gi)ieu respective finite bases of E, F, G, «:E -^ F, v:F -&gt; G two linear
mappings, M{u) the matrix of u relative to the bases (*,), (f k ), M{v) the matrix of v
relative to the bases (f k ), (g t ) and M(v o u) the matrix of v o u relative to the bases
( e i)&gt; (gi); then

(18 D) M(vou) = M(v)M(u)

(18 G) *M(o o u) = t M («)«Af (»).

We prove for example (18 G). For all a; e E, by (17 G) :
'Af(*). f M(ooM) = *M(o(k(*))) = *M(w(*)).*M(o) = *M(x). f Af(«). i *Af(p)

by associativity; the corollary then follows from no. 3, Proposition 1 since the

matrix t M{x) with one row is arbitrary.

Remark (1). Formula (17 D) can be considered as a special case of (18 D).
For there corresponds canonically to every xeE the linear mapping
O^rArf-s-E mapping every as A to xa. (§2, no. 1). It is immediate that
the matrix Af^*) with respect to the basis 1 of A^ and the basis (*,) of E
is just the matrix M(x); similarly M(Q uM ) = M(u{x)) and formula (17 D)
can therefore be considered as a translation of the relation

9u(*) — uo Q x .

Proposition 3. Let E, F be two right (resp. left) A-modules and (tf ( ) JeI , (/ fc ) fceK
finite bases ofE and F respectively. For every linear mapping u of E into F, let M(u)
be the matrix ofu with respect to the bases (e t ) and (f k ) . Then the matrix of l u : F* -» E*
with respect to the dual bases (/*) and (ef) is equal to t M{u).

E is canonically identified with its bidual E** and (e t ) with the dual basis
of (ef) ; then (supposing for example that E and F are right modules)

&lt; t u(ft),e i &gt; = &lt;ft,u(e i )&gt;,
whence the proposition.

344



MATRICES AND LINEAR MAPPINGS § 10.4

Remarks. (2) Let E and F be two left A-modules with bases (e { ) ie i and
(/«c)fceK respectively. For every A-linear mapping «:E— &gt; F, by (14 G),

u(e t ) = 2* u M f k ; these relations can also be interpreted by saying that the

column matrix (a(«i)&lt; e i) with elements in F is equal to the product 'M(u) . (f k ),
where (f k )keK 1S considered as a column matrix with elements in F and the
product is calculated for the mapping A x F -&gt; F defining the law of
action on the A-module F (no. 2).

(3) Let A, B be two commutative rings and o:A^Ba ring homomorphism.
In the notation of Proposition 3, (e t ® 1) and (f k ® 1) are respective
bases of E (B) = E ® A B and F (B) = F ® A B (§ 5, no. 1, Proposition
4) ; moreover, if (ef) and (/*) are respectively the dual bases of (e t ) and
(fk)) tnen ( e * ® 1) and (/* ® 1) are respectively the dual bases of
(e t ® 1) and (f k ® 1) (§ 5, no. 4). For every A-linear mapping u: E -&gt; F, let
M(u) and M(u ® 1) be the matrix of u with respect to (e t ) and (f k ) and
the matrix of the B-linear mapping u (g&gt; 1 with respect to (e t ® 1) and
(f k &lt;g&gt; 1). It follows from § 5, no. 4, formula (20) that

M(u &lt;g&gt; 1) = a(M(u)).

Consider a system of a finite number of right scalar linear equations in a
finite number of unknowns

(19) 2| ««*-** (*eK)

with a ki , x t , b k in A.

Let (e^iei, (f k ) keK De the canonical bases of E = Aj and F = Af ; the

system (19) is equivalent to the equation u(x) = b, where x = Z, £ ( # t ,

b = 2*f k b k and «:E -&gt; F is the linear mapping such that the matrix M(u)

with respect to the bases (e t ) and (f k ) are equal to A = (a ki ) ikti)eKxLl . This
matrix is called the matrix of the system of linear equations (19). Recall (§ 2, no.

8, Remarks 2 and 3), that, writing c t = 2*f k a M , the system (19) is equivalent
to the unique vector equation



(20) 2 cfy = b,



and as c i is the column of index i in the matrix A, we see that to say that the
system (19) admits a solution amounts to saying that the matrix b = (b k0 )
with one column is a linear combination of the columns of the matrix A.

We leave to the reader the task of formulating the analogous definitions
and remarks for systems of left linear equations.

345



LINEAR ALGEBRA



5. BLOCK PRODUCTS

The definitions of no. 4 can be generalized as follows. Let E be a (right or left)
A-module, the direct sum of a family (E 4 ) {eI of submodules. For all xeE,

let x = 2-i x, with x, e E, for all iel; we shall say that the column matrix

lei . .

M(x) — (*i)iei with elements in E is the matrix of x with respect to the decomposi-
tion (E,) ieI of E as a direct sum.

Let F be another A-module (E and F being both right A-modules or both
left A-modules) and suppose that F is the direct sum of a family (F fc ) fc6K of

submodules. For all u e Hom(E, F) and all x t e E i} let u(x t ) = 2* u ki (x t ) with

u kii x i) e F fc for all k e K; then u ki e Hom(E l5 F fc ) ; we shall say that the matrix
M (u) = (u ki ) ck oskxi of type (K, I) with elements in the set H the sum of
the Hom(Ej, F fc ) is the matrix ofu with respect to the decompositions (E,) and (F fc )
of E and F as direct sums.

With these definitions, it is obvious that if u, v are two A-linear mappings
of E into F then, for matrices with respect to the same decompositions as
direct sums

(21) M{u + v) = M(u) + M(v), M(yu) = yM(u)

for every element y of the centre of A (no. 2, Remark).

Moreover, the definition of the u kl shows that, if K is finite, we can write

(22) M(u(x)) = M{u).M(x)

where M(u(x)) is the matrix of u(x) with respect to the decomposition (F fc ),
the product on the right hand side of (22) being calculated for the mappings
(t, z) ^ t(z) of Hom(Ei, F fc ) x E t into F k (no. 2, Remark).

Let G be a third A-module, the direct sum of a family (G 2 ) Z6L of submodules,
so that there corresponds to every A-linear mapping z&gt;:F-&gt;G a matrix
M{v) = (v lk ) with respect to the decompositions (F fc ) and (Gj). If I, K and
L axe finite, then

(23) M(v°u) = M{v).M{u)

where the left hand side is the matrix (w H ) o£w = vou with respect to the
decomposition (E f ) and (G z ) and the product on the left hand side is calcu-
lated for the mappings (t, s) ^ t o s of Hom(F fc , G z ) x Hom(E i5 F k ) into
Hom(Ej, G,) (no. 2, Remark). This is just formula (32) of § 1, no. 8, ex-
pressed in terms of matrices.

Finally, if I and K are assumed to be finite, E* (resp. F*) is canonically
identified with the direct sum of the modules E* (resp. F*) (§ 2, no. 6, Proposi-
tion 10) . Then it is immediately verified that the matrix of f u with respect to the
decompositions (F*) and (E*) is just ('%{)(*;, t)sK xi-

346



MATRIX OF A SEMI-LINEAR MAPPING § 10.6

Suppose now that I and K are finite and further that each of the E t (resp.
F fc ) admits a finite basis. It amounts to the same to say that E (resp. F) admits
a basis (e r ) reB , (resp. (/ s ) !€g ) and that R (resp. S) admits a partition (R^tei
(resp. (S fc ) fceK ) such that for all zel (resp. keK.), (^ r ) r6 R, is a basis of E t
(resp. (f s )ses k i s a basis of F fc ). Then, if X = M{u) is the matrix of u with
respect to the bases (&lt;? r ) reB and (f s ) se s, the matrix X ki = M(u M ) with respect
to the bases (« r ) reBj and (f s ) S es k ^ s J ust the submatrix of X obtained by suppress-
ing the rows of index s $ S fc and the columns of index r ^ R 4 . Thus we define
a one-to-one correspondence

(24) X^(Xki)&lt;.k,i)eKxl

between the set of matrices of type (S, R) with elements in A and the set of
matrices of matrices (X w ) ftii)eKxI of type K x I, where each X fcJ is a matrix over
A of type (S fc , Rj). Suppose that further G admits a finite basis (g t )teT an d that
T = (Tj), 6L is a partition of T such that, for each / e L, (^) tG T, is a basis of
G,; let Y = M(z&gt;) be the matrix of v with respect to the bases (f s ) se s and
(gt)teT, Yik = M{v lk ) that of v lk with respect to the bases (/ s ) seSfc and (&amp;)&lt; 6Tj ,
Z = Af (a;) the matrix of w = v o u with respect to the bases (e r ) reIi and
(ititer an d Zji = Af (a;, { ) that of z% with respect to the bases (* r ) re R, and
(^t)teTp then it follows from (23) that the submatrices Z u of Z = YX are
given by

(25) Z„ = 2 Y lk X M

in other words, the one-to-one correspondence (24) transforms products into
products when all the products in question are defined (products of matrices
of matrices being defined in the sense of no. 2, Remark) ; when the submat-
rices Z n of the product YX are calculated thus, this product is said to be
carried out "in blocks".

This name arises from the fact that, when I = (l,/&gt;) and K = (1, q],
the table representing the matrix X is envisaged as divided into "blocks"
forming an "array of matrices"

'Xii. X 12 ... Xx

•**21 -^-22 • • • X 2



X 1 X a n . . . X a



iql -Aq2

which is considered as a symbol denoting X when p and q are specific
integers sufficiently small for this to be practicable.

6. MATRIX OF A SEMI-LINEAR MAPPING

Let A, B be two rings, a : A -&gt; B a homomorphism of A into B, E a right
(resp. left) A-module with basis (^j)iei and F a right (resp. left) B-module with

347



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

basis (f k ) keK . Let w:E-»F be a semi-linear mapping relative to a and

u(e t ) = 2i, f k u ki I resp. u(e t ) = 2-, u ki f k ), where the u ki are therefore elements

of B; by definition, the matrix M(u) — (u ki ) of type K x I is also called the
matrix of u with respect to the bases (e^ and (f k ). By the same calculation as in
Proposition 2 of no. 4, it is immediately verified that for all x e E, if I and
K are finite,

(26 D) M(u(x)) = M(u).c(M(x))

(resp.

(26 G) t M{u{x)) = a(*M(*)).*Af(«)).

Let G be a third ring, t : B -&gt; C a homomorphism, G a right (resp. left)
C-module with basis (gj)i 6L and v a semi-linear mapping of F into G relative
to t; if M(v) is the matrix of v with respect to (f k ) and (g t ) and M(v ° u)
the matrix ofvou relative to (*j) and (gi), then, if I, K and L are finite,

(27 D) M(v o u) = M(v) . t(M («))

(resp.

(27 G) t M (vo U ) = t(&lt; Af («) ) . &lt;M (v) ) .

To show for example (27 D), note that for all * e E, by (26 D),

M(vou).t{&lt;j(M(x))) = Af (»(«(*)))

= M(v).t{M(u{x))) = M(»).T(Af(tt)).T(a(Af (*))),

whence (27 D) by Proposition 1 of no. 3.

Suppose finally that a: A -» B is an isomorphism; then recall that 'w:F* -&gt; E*
is a semi-linear mapping relative to ct" 1 (§2, no. 5); when I and K are
finite, the matrix *u with respect to the dual bases (/£) and (ef) is given by

(28) M{ l u) = o'^Miu))

for, by definition, supposing for example that E and F are right modules,
&lt; { «(/ fc *), ^&gt;° = &lt;/*, m(*j)&gt; when a is denoted by x h* x°.

Remark. Let A be a ring and o an anti-endomorphism of A (no. 3) ; consider
the two following situations :

(GD) E is a left A-module, F a right A-module and u a Z-linear mapping
of E into F such that u{ax) = u{x)a{a) for a 6 A, xeE; in other words,
u is a semi-linear mapping relative to o of the right A°-module E into the
right A-module F.

(DG) E is a right A-module, F a left A-module and u a Z-linear mapping
of E into F such that u(xa) = a(a)u(x) for aeA, xeE; in other words,
u is a semi-linear mapping relative to o of the left A°-module E into the left
A-module F.

348



SQUARE MATRICES § 10.7

In the two cases, the matrix M («) of u relative to bases of E and F has
its elements in A; if these bases are finite, then, for all *eE, we have the
respective formulae

(17 GD) M{u(x)) = M(u).a(M(x))

(17 DG) t M(u(x)) = c^Mix^^Miu),

the products on the two sides being calculated in A. This follows immedi-
ately from (26 D) and (26 G) respectively.

7. SQUARE MATRICES

Definition 4. A matrix whose rows and columns have the same indexing set is called
a square matrix.

A square matrix with n rows and n columns is called a matrix of order n.

Remark. It should be noted that a matrix for which the indexing sets of
the rows and columns have the same cardinal but are not identical, must not
be considered as a square matrix; in particular, the product of two such
matrices over a ring is not defined.

Clearly addition and multiplication of square matrices over A with a finite
set as indexing set of the rows and columns, define on the set of these matri-
ces a ring structure because of formulae (7), (8) and (9) (no. 3); the
matrix (S tf ), where 8 W is the Kronecker index (for /el, J el), is the unit
element of this ring and is denoted by I n or l n when I has n elements. When
I = (1, n), the ring of matrices thus defined is denoted simply by M n (A);
the group of invertible elements of M n (A) is denoted by GL n (A) or GL(«, A).

For a square matrix U = (%) of order n over A to be right (resp. left)
invertible, it is necessary and sufficient that, for every system (bi) 1&lt;i&lt;n of
elements of A, the system of n equations in n unknowns

n

.2, a^ = hi (1 &lt; t &lt; n)



(resp. Z x x } a n = bj



have one solution (#,) in A.

Let I be a finite indexing set, A a ring and E a right (resp. left) A-module
with basis {e^) iel . For every endomorphism u of E, the matrix M (u) of u with
respect to the two bases identical with (e t ) is a square matrix; more briefly, it
is called the matrix of u with respect to the basis (*,) .

Suppose that I = (1, «). The mapping m^- M(u) (resp. u t-&gt; l M(u)) is an
isomorphism of the ring End A (E) onto M n (A) (resp. onto the opposite ring of
M n (A), as follows from formulae (18 D) (resp. 18 G)) (no. 4). The invertible

349



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

elements of the ring M n (A) called invertible matrices, correspond under the
mapping u*-^-M(u) (resp. m i-* 'Af(tt)) to the automorphisms of E; the group
GL(w, A) is therefore canonically identified with the group GL(A£).

If u is an automorphism of E, its contragredient &amp; is an automorphism of the
left (resp. right) A-module E*, such that &amp; == ('u)' 1 = '(a -1 ) (§2, no. 5,
Definition 6) ; if M(&amp;) is the matrix of &amp; with respect to the dual basis (ef),
then, by virtue of Proposition 3 (no. 4),

(29) M(&amp;) = (*M (a))" 1 = ^(u" 1 ).

For every invertible matrix X, it therefore follows that f (X _1 ) = (fX)~ x \
this matrix is also denoted by l X ~ x and called the contragredient of the matrix X.

Let a be an automorphism of the ring A; for every semi-linear mapping
u : E — &gt; E relative to a, the matrix M(u) of this mapping with respect to
a basis (e t ) of E is also a square matrix. It follows immediately from (27 D)
(no. 6) that, if u is bijective, then

Miu- 1 ) = (a-^Miu)))- 1 .

Let E be an A-module which is the direct sum of a finite family (E^g! of
submodules; for every endomorphism u of E, the matrix M(u) = (u ki ) of
u with respect to the two decompositions of E identical with (E { ) (no. 5) is
a square matrix of linear mappings. In order that u(E t ) &lt;= E { for all i e I, it is
necessary and sufficient that u kt = for k ^ *. When 1 = (1, n), the rela-
tions

a(E 1 ) cE, + E i + 1 + • • • + E B (1 ^ i &lt; n)
are equivalent to the relations u ki = for k &lt; i.
Examples of square matrices. I. Diagonal matrices. In a square matrix

M = (w*i K )(i,K)eIxl}

the elements both of whose indices are equal are called diagonal elements and
the family (m u ) te i is called the diagonal of M; a square matrix M = (m lK )
over a ring, whose elements other than the diagonal elements are zero, is
called a diagonal matrix. For every family (a t \ eI of elements of a ring A, the
diagonal matrix (m tK ) such that m u = a t for all i e I is denoted by diag(a l ) teI
(or diag(a l5 a 2 , . . ., a n ) when I = (1, n)). In the set M n (A) of square matrices
of order n over A, the unit matrix I n is a diagonal matrix and also every mul-
tiple al n = I n a of this matrix by a scalar a (the diagonal matrix (called scalar)
all of whose diagonal elements are equal to a).

For every family (di) 1&lt;i&lt;n of elements of A and every matrix X = (x tj )
of type (n, q) (resp. (p, n)) over A, writing D = diag(rf ( ),

, m (DX=(d iXii )

V°&gt; \XD = { Xii d } ).

350



SQUARE MATRICES § 10.7

In particular, for two diagonal matrices of order n,

diagfa) + diag(6,) = diagfa + b t )
diag(o J ).diag(* J ) = diag(a t &amp; t ).

The diagonal matrices therefore form a subring of M n (A) isomorphic to the
product ring A n ; the scalar matrices form a subring isomorphic to A.

II. Permutation matrices; monomial matrices. Let n be any permutation of a
finite set I and let (&lt;? 4 ) ie i be the canonical basis of the A-module E = Ajj;
there exists one and only one endomorphism u n of E such that, for all i e I,
U M = *«(„ (§1, no. 11, Corollary 3 to Proposition 17). For all iel, the
column of index i in the matrix M(u n ) with respect to the basis («,) has
all its elements zero except the one in the row of index 7c(i), which is equal
to 1. By an abuse of language, Af(« 3t ) is called the matrix of the permutation w.
It is immediate that for any two permutations c, t of I, m ot = «„oa t and
that for the identity permutation s, w E is the identity; the mapping 7u \-+ M(u n )
is therefore an isomorphism of the symmetric group &amp; z onto the group of permuta-
tion matrices.

Each row and each column of a permutation matrix contains only a
single element ^0. A finite square matrix R over a non-zero ring A,
with this property, is called a monomial matrix; let r t be the unique element
■£ in the column of R of index i and let n(i) be the index of the row where
this element is; clearly tz is a permutation of the indexing set I and
R = M(u^D, where D = diag(r,).

III. Triangular matrices. In the ring M n (A) of square matrices of order n
over a ring A, any matrix (a u ) such that a if = for i &gt; j (resp. i &lt; j) is
called an upper (resp. lower) triangular matrix; it is also said that such a matrix
has only zeros below (resp. above) its diagonal. It is immediately established that
the upper (resp. lower) triangular matrices form a subring S (resp. T) of
M^A), SnT being obviously the ring of diagonal matrices.

The set S' (resp. T') of matrices in S (resp. T) whose diagonal elements
are invertible is a multiplicative group of matrices called the upper (resp. lower)
total triangular group, this follows immediately from § 1, no. 11, Remark 5. The
set S x (resp. T x ) of matrices in S (resp. T) whose diagonal elements are all
equal to 1 is a subgroup of the above group, called the upper (resp. lower) strict
triangular group, and every matrix M e S' (resp. M e T') whose diagonal is {d x ),
may be written as M = DM X = M^D, where D = diag(rf t ) and M t and M' x
matrices belonging to S x (resp. T x ).

IV. Diagonal and triangular matrices of matrices. Let (Ifc)i&lt; fc &lt; p be a par-
tition of the finite set I; every square matrix over a ring A with indexing
set I can be written in the form of a square matrix of matrices corresponding

351



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

to the same partition (I fc ) of the indexing set of the rows and the indexing
set of the columns (no. 5)

(X\\ X 12 • • • X lp *
X 21 X 2 2 • • • X 2p
Xpi X p2 • • • X p

where each X kk is a square matrix with I fc as indexing set of the rows and
columns.

With this notation, (32) will be called a diagonal (resp. upper triangular,
resp. lower triangular) matrix of matrices if all the matrices X t] such that
i j£ j (resp. i &gt; j, resp. i &lt; j) are zero. The interpretation of endomorphisms
u whose matrix is a diagonal, resp. triangular, matrix of matrices has been
seen earlier, by considering the corresponding matrix M(u) of linear
mappings. The lower triangular (resp. upper triangular, diagonal) matrices
of matrices for a given partition (I fc ) of I form subrings of the ring of matrices
A 1 x *. In particular, the ring of diagonal matrices of matrices relative to

p

the partition (I fc ) is isomorphic to the product II End A (E fc ).

8. CHANGE OF BASES

Proposition 4. Let E be a right A-module with finite basis (^)i«i^ n of n elements.

n

For a family ofn elements e\ = 2-, efl }i (1 ^ i ^ n) to be a basis ofE, it is necessary

i = i

and sufficient that the square matrix P = (a n ) of order n be invertible.

P is just the matrix, with respect to the basis (e t ) of the endomorphism u
of E defined by u(e t ) = e' t (1 ^ i &lt; n). Now, for u to be an automorphism
of E, it is necessary and sufficient that (u{e t )) be a basis of E (§ 1, no. 11,
Corollary 3 to Proposition 1 7) ; whence the proposition.

The invertible. matrix P is called the matrix of passage from the basis (e t ) to
the basis (e\). It can also be interpreted as the matrix of the identity mapping
1 E with respect to the bases {e\) and (&lt;?,) (in that order); then clearly the matrix
of passage from the basis (e'i) to the basis (e t ) is the inverse P _1 of P.

Proposition 5. Let (e t ), (e\) be two bases of n elements ofE and P the matrix of
passage from (e t ) to (e^). If (et) and (el*) are the respective dual bases of (e t ) and (e\),
the matrix of passage from (ef) to (e\*) is the contragredient t P~ 1 ofP.

The transpose of the identity mapping 1 E is the identity mapping 1 E *;
by Proposition 3, no. 4, the matrix of 1 E . with respect to the bases (^*) and (e*)
(in that order) is the transpose of the matrix of 1 E with respect to the bases (e x )
and (e\) (in that order), that is the transpose of P' 1 .

Proposition 6. Let E and F be two right A-modules, (e t ) and (e' t ) two bases of E
352



CHANGE OF BASES § 10.8

with n elements, (f) and {fj) two bases ofF with m elements, P the matrix of passage
from (e t ) to (e^) and Q the matrix of passage from (f) to (//). For every linear mapping
uofE into F, let M(u) be the matrix ofu with respect to the bases {e x ) and (f) and
M'(u) the matrix ofu with respect to the bases (ej) and (f{); then

(33 D) M'(u) = Q~ 1 M(u)P.

We may write u = l F o«ol B . Formula (33) follows immediately from no. 4,
Corollary to Proposition 2 when the matrix of 1 B is taken with respect to (e\)
and (tfj), that oft* with respect to (e t ) and (jQ and that of l p with respect to
(/,) and (/J).

Corollary 1. If u is an endomorphism of E and M(i&lt;) and M'(u) its matrices
with respect to the bases (e t ) and (e' t ) respectively, then

(34 D) M'(u) =P~ 1 M{u)P.

Corollary 2. If M(x) and M'(x) are the matrices with one column of the same
element «eE with respect to the bases (e t ) and (e't) respectively, then

(35 D) M(x) = P.M'{x).

This is a special case of Proposition 6, applied to the mapping Q x :a *-*■ xa
of A d to E (no. 4, Remark 1).

Formula (35) is equivalent to

n

(36 D) x t = 2 ay*; (1 ^i ^n)

for the elements x t and x\ of the matrices M (x) and M'(x) respectively.
Formulae (36 D) are called formulae of change of coordinates. Observe that they
express the components of x relative to the "old" basis (e t ) as functions of the
components of x relative to the "new" basis (e' t ) and the elements of P, that
is the components of the "new" basis relative to the "old" basis.

Remarks. (1) We now start with a left A-module E with two bases (e,), {e\),

n

each with n elements; if we write e\ — 2* a n e u P = (a H ) is also called the

matrix of passing from (e,) to (e' t ) ; it is also the matrix of the automorphism of
E such that u(e t ) = e\, with respect to the basis (e t ) and also the matrix of
1 E with respect to the bases (e' t ) and (e t ) in that order. The above results then
hold with only the following modifications : formulae (33 D) to (36 D) are
respectively replaced by

(33 G) «M'(») = «/&gt;.'Af (u) .'Q" 1

(34 G) *Af'(«) = 'P.'M^.tp- 1

(35 G) t M(u) = t M'(u). t P.

353



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

n

(36 G) xt = 2 x'ja i} (1 &lt; »' &lt; n).

(2) Under the hypotheses of Proposition 4, consider an element x* e E* ;
as the matrix of passage from (ef) to (e'*) is t P~ 1 (Proposition 5), for the
matrices Af (**) and M' (**) of #* with respect to these two bases respectively,

*M(x*) = «Af'(**).P- 1
or also

(37 D) l M'{x*) = *M(x*).P

which is equivalent to the system of equations

n

(38 D) xf = y 2 xfajt (1 &lt; i &lt; »)

for the elements (*f) and (*{*) of the matrices Af (**) and Af' (**). The
corresponding formulae for a left A-module E are

(37 G) M'(x*) = *P.M{x*)

n

(38 G) x[* = y 2 fl^f (1 &lt; » &lt; n).

(3) Let A, B be two rings, a: A -&gt; B a homomorphism of A into B, E a right
(resp. left) A-module, (&lt;?,), (4) two bases with n elements of E, F a right (resp.
left) B-module, (jQ, (fj) two bases with m elements of F and P (resp. Q)
the matrix of passage from (e x ) to (c{) (resp. from (f f ) to (//)).

For every semi-linear mapping u : E -&gt; F, relative to cr, let Af («) be the matrix
of a with respect to (*,) and (/ y ) and Af' (a) its matrix with respect to («J)
and (//). Then

(39 D) Af'(a) = Q-iMifiaiP)

(resp.

(39 G) 'Af '(a) = &lt;y(*P) . { Af (a) .'Q" 1 ).

The proof is the same as that for (33 D) and (33 G), this time using formulae
(27 D) and (27 G) (no. 6).

9. EQUIVALENT MATRICES; SIMILAR MATRICES

Definition 5. Two matrices X, X' with m rows and n columns over a ring are
called equivalent if there exists an invertible square matrix P of order m and an invert-
ible square matrix Q of order n such that

(40) X' = PXQ.

354



EQUIVALENT MATRICES; SIMILAR MATRICES § 10.9

Clearly the relation "X and X' are equivalent" is an equivalence relation
{Set Theory, II, § 6, no. 1) on the set^4 mn of matrices of type (m, n) over A, which
justifies the terminology.

With this definition, Proposition 6 of no. 8 can be stated by saying that when
the bases are changed in two right A-modules E, F (with finite bases), the
matrix of a linear mapping u: E -&gt; F with respect to the new bases is equivalent
to the matrix of u with respect to the old bases.

Conversely, if relation (40) holds and u : A^ -&gt; A" is a linear mapping whose
matrix is Xwith respect to the respective canonical bases fa) and (f) of AS and
A™, then X' is the matrix of u with respect to the bases («() and (fj) such that Q
is the matrix of passage from fa) to (&lt;?{) and P~ x the matrix of passage from
C/y) to (/,').

Examples of equivalent matrices. (1) Two matrices X = (%) and X' — (x' tj )
with m rows and n columns "differ only in the order of their rows" if there
exists a permutation a of the interval (1, m) of N, such that for every ordered
pair of indices (i,j), x' tj = x aWii (we also say that X' is obtained by per-
forming the permutation c _1 on the rows of X). The matrices X and X'
are then equivalent, for X' = PX, where P is the matrix of the permutation
o" 1 (cf. no. 7, Example II).

Similarly X and X' are said to differ only in the order of their columns if there
exists a permutation t of (1, n) such that x' i} = x itXij) for every ordered
pair of indices (i,j), X and X' are also equivalent, for X' = XQ where Q
is the matrix of the permutation t.

Note that in the above notation P is the matrix of passage from a basis
C//)i&lt;/&lt;m to the basis (/ - 1 o))i&lt;y&lt;m an d Q the matrix of passage from a
basis fa) 1&lt;i&lt;n to the basis y i&lt;Kn .

(2) Let j, k be distinct elements of (1, n) and let a e A.

Suppose that for 1 &lt; t &lt; m, x\ } — x„ + x ik a and x' tl = #„ for j ?£ / and
1 &lt; i &lt; m; X' is said to be derived from JST by adding to the column of X
of index j the column of index k multiplied on the right by a. In this case X and
X' are also equivalent: for if Q = I n + aE ki (an invertible triangular
matrix, as seen in no. 7), then X' = XQ.

Similarly, let h, i be two distinct elements of (1, m) and a an element
of A; if X' is derived from X by adding to the row of X of index i the row
of index h multiplied on the left by a, X and X' are equivalent, for X' = PX,
where P = I m + aE lh .

(3) Finally, if, for a given index j, x\ f = x i} c for 1 &lt; i &lt; m, where c is
invertible and #,', = #„ for 1 ^ t &lt; m and I ^ j, X and Jf' are equivalent;
for X' = XQ, where Q is the matrix diag(a fc ) with a } = c, a k = 1 for
A; ^ J. Then -XT' is said to be derived from X by multiplying the column of X
of index j on the right by a.

Similarly, if X' is derived from X' by multiplying the row of X of
index i on the left by an invertible element c e A, X' and X are equiva-
lent, for X' = PX where P is the matrix diag(b h ) with b t = c, b h = 1 for
A ^ i.

355



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Definition 6. Two square matrices X, X' of order n over a ring A are called similar
if there exists an invertible square matrix P of order n such that

(41) X' = PXP~ 1

Clearly the relation "X and X' are similar" is an equivalence relation on
M n (A) meaning that X and X' are transformed into one another by an inner
automorphism of this ring.

With this definition, Corollary 1 to Proposition 6 of no. 8 can be stated by
saying that when the basis of an A-module E (with a finite basis) is changed,
the matrix of an endomorphism u with respect to the new basis is similar to the
matrix of u with respect to the old basis.

Remarks. (1) Two square matrices which differ only in the order of their
rows (or the order of their columns) are equivalent, but in general not
similar. A matrix similar to a square matrix X = (x u ) can be obtained by
performing the same permutation a -1 on the rows and columns, that is by
considering the matrix X' = (x[j), where x' tj = x oW§aU) for every ordered
pair of indices; for if X is the matrix of an endomorphism u of A^ with
respect to a basis (e i ) 1 ^ i&lt;:n , X' is the matrix of u with respect to the basis

( f o(«)l«i*sn-

(2) Let X and X' be two square matrices of order n which can be written
in the form of diagonal matrices of square matrices (no. 7, Example IV) :



X' =



*X' X
XX







corresponding to the same partition of the indexing set (1, n) for X and X'.
If, for 1 &lt; i &lt; p, X { and X[ are equivalent (resp. similar), then X and X'
are equivalent (resp. similar) : for, if X' x = P t X t Qi for 1 &lt; i &lt;; p, then
X' = PXQ where



P =




as follows from calculating the "block" product (no. 6). Moreover, if Q t =
Pf 1 for all i, then Q = P" 1 .

10. TENSOR PRODUCT OF MATRICES OVER A COMMUTATIVE RING

Let C be a commutative ring, E, F, U, V four C-modules and (j&gt; : E -&gt; U,
^ : F -&gt; V two C-linear mappings. Suppose that E, F, U, V have respectively

356



TENSOR PRODUCT OF MATRICES OVER A COMMUTATIVE RING § 10.10

finite bases {e K ) Keh , (/ u ) ueM5 (" P ) P eR&gt; (OoesJ let A = (a pK ) be the matrix of
&lt;j) with respect to (e K ) and (u ), B = (b aiX ) that of ^ with respect to (/J and
(v a ). For every ordered pair (X, (x) eh x M = N, let ^ u = * x ®/ u ; for
every ordered pair (p, a) e R x S = T let o;^ = w p ® p c ; the g^ then form
a basis of E &lt;g&gt; F and the w pa a basis of U &lt;g) V (§3, no. 6, Corollary 2 to
Proposition 7). The tensor product of ^4 by Z?, denoted by A &lt;g&gt; B, is the matrix
X = (* TV )(T,v)eTxN whose elements are given by

(42) #( Pt a), &lt;\, U ) = tfpaAiu-

Then 4 &lt;g) 5 is Me matfn* o/"&lt;J&gt; &lt;g) ^ a^A rajterf /o the bases (g Kil ) and (a&gt; po ).
By definition (§ 3, no. 2, formula (3))

(* ® +)(**») = (4&gt; ® 40 K ®/J = &lt;KO ® &lt;K/u)
= Z a pK b ail (u p &lt;g&gt; » c ) = 2 a P Au"W

Definition (42) of the elements of i4 ® 5 shows that this matrix corresponds
bijectively with the matrix of matrices (a pX B) (Pf „ eBxL and also the matrix

Wfa.WeSxM ( n O. 5).

The fact that (&lt;J&gt;, &lt;J&gt;) »-&gt; &lt;j&gt; &lt;g&gt; &lt;J&gt; is a C-bilinear mapping and formula (9)
of § 3, no. 5, can be expressed by the identities

(43) (A®(B 1 +B a )=A®B 1 +A® B 2

1 \{A X + A 2 ) ®B = A x &lt;g&gt;B + A 2 &lt;g&gt;B

(44) (cA) ®B = A® (cB) = c(A ® B) for c e G

(45) Mx ® 50^ ®£ 2 ) = (A X A 2 ) &lt;g&gt; {B X B 2 )

when the operations appearing are defined. The transpose of a tensor product
of matrices is given by

(46) \A ® B) = (*A) ® (*B).

If A and 5 are invertible square matrices over C, A ® B is invertible and

(47) (il 5)" 1 * (A- 1 ) ®(B~i).

Let «) XeL be another basis of E and (/u') U6M another basis of F; if P is
the matrix of passage from the basis (e K ) to the basis (e' K ) and Q the matrix
of passage from the basis (/J to the basis (/„'), the matrix of passage from
the basis (e K 0/ w ) to the basis («£ ®/ u ') is P ® Q. If A' is equivalent (resp.
similar) to ^4 and 5' equivalent (resp. similar) to 5, then .4' &lt;g) 5' is equivalent
(resp. similar) to A &lt;g&gt; B.

The definition of tensor product of matrices can be generalized in an

357



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

obvious way to an arbitrary finite number of matrices over C; in particular
we have the associativity formula

for every partition (I l5 I a ) of the finite indexing set I.

11. TRACE OF A MATRIX

Let G be a commutative ring; for every square matrix X = (x u ) over C corres-
ponding to the finite indexing set I, the trace of X is the element

(49) Tr(Z) = 2 ■*«.

Let E be a G-module admitting a finite basis (e t ) iel ; for every endomorphism
u of E,

(50) Tr(«) = Tr(Af («))

M (u) being the matrix u with respect to the basis («,) ; this follows immediately
from § 4, no. 3, formula (17), when this formula is applied to the endomor-
phism x h-&gt; &lt;*, efye } (where &lt;f ) is the dual basis of («,)) ; from this we pass to the
general case by linearity. Formula (49) shows that

(51) Tr(«) = 2 &lt;«(«,), efy

for every basis (e t ) of E (cf. §4, no. 3, formula (17)).

If X is a matrix of type (m, n) over C and Y a matrix of type (n, m) over C,
then

(52) Tr(ZF) = Tr(FX)

as follows from the above and Proposition 3 of § 4, no. 3; (52) can also be
obtained directly, for if X = (* tf ), Y = {y n ) (1 ^ i ^ m, I ^ j &lt; «), then

(53) Tr(ZF) = 2 x ti y it
by (49). The latter formula proves moreover:

Proposition 7. Let C be a commutative ring and for every matrix PeM n (C) let
f P be the linear form X^Tr(PX) on M n (C); the mapping P^f P is a C-linear
bijection of M. n (C) onto its dual.

Propositions. If g is a linear form on the C-module M n (C) such that
g(XY) = g(YX)for all matrices X, Y in M»(C), there exists one and only one scalar
ceC such that g(X) = c.Tr(X) for every matrix X e M n (C).

Since the proposition is trivial for n = 1, attention may be confined to
358



MATRICES OVER A FIELD § 10.12

the case where n ^ 2. Taking X = E ij} Y = E jk with i ^ k, we obtain
g(E ik ) = 0; then taking X = E i} , Y = E jK with i # j, we find g(£„) = g(E„) ;
the proposition follows immediately since the E ti form a basis of M n (G).

12. MATRICES OVER A FIELD

The finite matrices with m rows and n columns over a field K are in one-to-one
correspondence with the linear mappings of the right vector space E = K2
into the right vector space K™ when the matrices of these mappings are taken
with respect to the canonical bases of E and F. By definition, the rank of such
a matrix X is the rank of the linear mapping «:E -&gt; F corresponding to it;
as this number is by definition the dimension of the subspace «(E) of F, it
amounts to the same (identifying the columns of X with the images under u
of the canonical basis of E) to give the following definition :

Definition 7. Given a matrix X with m rows and n columns over a field K, the
dimension of the subspace of K™ generated by the n columns of X is called the rank
of X with respect to K and denoted by rg(X).

It can also be said that the rank of X is the maximum number of linearly inde-
pendent columns of X (as elements of K£). Obviously rg(A') &lt; inf(m, n); for
every submatrix Y of X, rg(F) &lt; *g(X).

If E and F are two finite-dimensional vector spaces over K and u a linear
mapping of E into F, the rank of the matrix M(u) with respect to any two
bases is equal to the rank of u.

Proposition 9. If the elements of a matrix X with m rows and n columns belong to a
subfield K of a field K, the rank of X with respect to K is equal to the rank of X
with respect to K.

Let F be the right vector K -space generated by the canonical basis of the
right vector K-space E = K™ ; by hypothesis the columns of X belong to E .
Let V (resp. V) be the vector sub-K -space of F (resp. the vector sub-K-
space of E) generated by these columns. Then V = V ® Ko K (§ 8, no. 2,
Proposition 2) and hence dim K V = dim Ko V .

Proposition 10. The rank of a matrix X over afield K is equal to the rank of its
transpose t X over the opposite field K°.

In the notation introduced before Definition 7, the rank of u is equal to
that of 'a (§ 7, no. 5, Proposition 10) and the proposition therefore follows from
no. 4, Proposition 3.

It is thus seen that the rank of X can also be defined as the maximum number
of linearly independent rows of X (considering them as elements of the left vector
K-space KJ).

The square matrices of order n over a field K correspond objectively with
the endomorphisms of E = KJ and form a ring isomorphic to the ring

359



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

End K (E) (no. 7); corresponding to the automorphisms of E are the invertible
square matrices.

Proposition 11. Let X be a square matrix of order n over afield K. The following
properties are equivalent:

(a) X is invertible in M n (K).

(b) X is right invertible in M n (K).

(c) X is left invertible in M n (K).

(d) X is of rank n.

This is just a translation of § 7, no. 4, Corollary to Proposition 9.
Proposition 12. For a system ofm linear equations in n unknowns

n

(54) 2* OijXj = b t (1 ^ i ^ m)
j = i

over afield K to have at least one solution, it is necessary and sufficient that the matrix

A = (a^) of the system and the matrix B, obtained by bordering A with an (n + \)-th

column equal to (b t ), be matrices of the same rank.

It has been seen (no. 4) that the existence of a solution of (54) is equivalent to
the fact that the column (6 t ) is a linear combination of the columns of A and
the proposition therefore follows from § 7, no. 3, Corollary 4 to Proposition 4.

Note that the condition of Proposition 12 is always fulfilled when m = n
and A is invertible, that is of rank n (Proposition 11). If* and b then denote
the matrices with one column (#,) and (£ 4 ) respectively, system (54) is equiva-
lent to A . x = b and its unique solution is * = A ~ 1 . b.

13. EQUIVALENCE OF MATRICES OVER A FIELD

Proposition 13. Let E, F be two finite-dimensional vector spaces over a field K.
Ifw.E -&gt; F is a linear mapping of rank r, there exist bases q/E and F such that, with
respect to these bases,

(55) M(a) = (o r J)-

Every matrix of type (m, n) over K and of rank r is equivalent to a matrix of the form
(55).

The second assertion is trivially equivalent to the first. To show the latter,

let dim E = n, dim F = m. The kernel N = u (0) is of dimension n — r (§ 7,
no. 4, formula (11)); let V be a supplementary subspace of N in E and
(*i)i&lt;i«n a basis of E such that (*i)i&lt;«&lt;, is a basis of V and (^) r + i&lt;{&lt; n a basis
of N. Then the u(e } ) (1 &lt;j^r) form a basis of «(E); hence there exists a
basis {fs)i&lt;i*m of F such that /y = u ( e i) for l &lt; J &lt; r (§ 7 &gt; no - l &gt; Theorem 2)

360



EQUIVALENCE OF MATRICES OVER A FIELD



§10.13



and clearly with respect to the bases (*,) and (/,) the matrix M(u) is given by
(55).

Corollary. For two matrices over afield, of type (m, n), to be equivalent, it is
necessary and sufficient that they have the same rank.

We shall now recover Proposition 13 by another more explicit method.
For every ring A, every X e A, every integer m &gt; 1 and every ordered pair
of distinct integers i,j in (1, m), we write

(56) J? tf (X) = 4 + lEit

an invertible matrix of order m by no. 8.

Lemma 1. Let X = (£,_,) be a matrix of type (m, n) over a ring A. Suppose that
m ^ 2 and that there exists an element £ u in the first column of X which is invertible
in A. Then there exist two invertible square matrices P e M m (A), Q e M n (A) and a
matrix Y of type (m — 1, n — 1) over A such that P (resp. Q) is a product of matrices
of the form # W (X) of order m (resp. n) and



(57)



PXQ =



'1


,0



ON



The matrix -B w (X)Xis obtained by adding to the row of X of index i the row
of index j multiplied on the left by X (no. 9, Example 2) ; if £ {1 is invertible, then
there exists Xe A such that, for the matrix X' = B lt (X)X = (Z, f k i), £ii = 1;
multiplying X' on the left by suitably chosen matrices B kl ([L k ) of order m (for
1 ^ k ^ m), a matrix X" = (££,) is obtained such that % jX = 1, %, kl = for
k # 1 . Then the matrix obtained is multiplied successively on the right by suit-
able matrices B^vj) of order n (2 ^j ^ n) and a matrix is obtained of the
form (57).

Proposition 14. Let X be a matrix of type (m, n) over afield K. If X is of rank r,
there exist two invertible square matrices P e M m (K), Q e M n (K) such that P (resp.
Q) is a product of matrices of order m (resp. n) of the form 5 W (X) and



(58)



PXQ =



f ° ■■

1 .


.00.
.00.


• °\

.


.
.


. S r .
.00.


.
.


. . .
\o .


.00.


■ of



361



LINEAR ALGEBRA



{a matrix (•%) all of whose terms are zero except the i) H for 1 ^ i ^ r, with % = 1
for 1 ^ i ' ^ r — 1, 7] rr = 8 r 7&gt;^ 0). If r ^ m or r ^ n, zV ma# also be assumed
that S r = 1.

The proposition is obvious if X = 0; suppose therefore X =fi 0. If m = n = 1
the proposition is obvious (with P = I m , Q = I n) 8 X ^ arbitrary). If n = 1,
m ^ 2, we can apply Lemma 1 (since X ^ 0), which gives the desired form
(58) with r = 1, S r = 1. We argue by induction on«&gt; 1; there exists an
element £ w # in X; if j = 1, Lemma 1 can be applied and reduces the
problem to the case where X has the form (57). The induction hypothesis
then applies to Y and there are therefore invertible matrices

P'eM^CK), Q'eM._ 1 (K)

which are products of matrices of the form B xi (X) of order m — 1 (resp. n — 1),
such that P'YQ' is of the form (58). But, if -6 W (X) belongs for example to
M m . 1 (K), then

/l \

formula (58) then follows from the formula for block products writing

P-f 1 °) and Q=( l °V
\0 P'J V0 Q'J

If finally,; # 1, it would be sufficient to consider the matrix XB n (l) to reduce
it to the above case.

Proposition 14 recovers Proposition 13 immediately.

Corollary 1. IfXis an invertible square matrix of order n over afield K, there exist
three invertible matrices P, Q,D of order n such that X = PDQ, P and Q being
products of matrices of the form B^X) andD a diagonal matrix of the form

Z&gt; = diag(l, 1,...,8),
where 8 # (cf. Exercise 13).

Corollary 2. For every field K, the group of invertible matrices GL(n, K) is
generated by the permutation matrices (no. 7, Example 2), the diagonal matrices
diag(a, 1, . . . , 1) {a # in K) and the matrices -#i 2 (X) (X e K).

It has been seen (no. 9) that the right (resp. left) product of a matrix by the
matrix of a suitable transposition exchanges any two columns (resp. rows) .
Then the matrix diag(l, . . ., 1, a) is equal to the product of diag(a, 1, . . ., 1)
and permutation matrices and every matrix 2?y(X) is equal to the product of
J5 12 (X) and permutation matrices, whence the corollary.

362



GRADED COMMUTATIVE GROUPS § 1 1 . 1

Remarks. (1) In Chapter III, we shall see that, if m — n = r and K is comm-
utative, then, for all choices of P and Q satisfying the conditions of Proposition
14, the element 8 r is always the same and equal to the determinant of X (III,
§ 8, no. 6).

(2) The argument of Proposition 14, slightly modified, shows that there
is a permutation matrix R such that (with the same conditions on P)



PXR



- C ".)



if m = n = r does not hold, and

PXR = diag(l,..., 1,8)

otherwise. Observe also that the method of proof gives an explicit determina-
tion of the matrices P, Q, R when X is given explicitly.



§ 11. GRADED MODULES AND RINGS

From no. 2 of this paragraph onwards, A will denote a commutative monoid (I, § 2, no. 1),
written additively, with an identity element denoted by 0.

1. GRADED COMMUTATIVE GROUPS

We are going to translate into another language the definitions concerning
direct sums (§ 1, no. 8).

Definition 1 . Given a commutative group G written additively and a set A, a gradua-
tion of type A on G is a family (G K ) KeIj of subgroups ofG, of which G is the direct sum.
The set G, with the structure defined by its group law and its graduation, is called a
graded (commutative) group of type A.

A is called the set of degrees of G. An element x e G is called homogeneous if it
belongs to one of the G K , homogeneous of degree X if x e G k . The element is
therefore homogeneous of all degrees; but if x # is homogeneous, it belongs
to only one of the G^; the index X such that x e G K is then called the degree ofx
(or sometimes the weight of #) and is sometimes denoted by deg(#). Every y e G

may be written uniquely as a sum 2i, y K of homogeneous elements withy x e G x ;

y K is called the homogeneous component of degree X (or simply the component of degree
X) of y. When the word "weight" is used instead of "degree", the adjective
"homogeneous" is replaced by "isobaric".

Examples. (1) Given any commutative monoid A (with identity element 0) and
a commutative group G, a graduation (G x ) XeA is defined on G by taking
G = G and G A = {0} for X ^ 0; this graduation is called trivial.

363



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

(2) Let A, A' be two sets and p a mapping of A into A'. Let (G x ) XeA be a
graduation of type A on a commutative group G ; for ;x e A', let G^ be the sum of
the G x such that p(X) = [x; clearly (G£)n eA » is a graduation of type A' on G,
said to be derived from (G x ) by means of the mapping p.

When A is a commutative group written additively and p the mapping
X h-&gt; —X of A onto itself, (G^) is called the opposite graduation of (G*).

(3) If A = A x x A 2 is a product of two sets, a graduation of type A is called

a bigraduation of types A 1? A 2 . For all X e A 1? let G' K = G Xll and, for all

[A e A 2 , let G£ = G Xli ; clearly (G x )„ 6Al is a graduation of type A x and

(Gu)u eA2 a graduation of type A 2 on G; these graduations are called the
partial graduations derived from the bigraduation (G Xli ). Note that
G X|t = GinG;; conversely, if (G£) XeAl and (G^) ueA2 are two graduations on
G such that G is the direct sum of the G„ u = G x n GJ, these subgroups form a
bigraduation of types A l5 A 2 on G, of which (G x ) and (GJ) are the partial
graduations. We leave to the reader the task of generalizing this to the case
where A is a finite product of sets.

(4) Let A be a commutative monoid written additively, with identity
element denoted by 0; let I be any set and A^ = A denote the submonoid of
the product Aq consisting of the families (X t ) l6l of finite support. Let p: A -^ A
be the surjective (codiagonal) homomorphism of A into A defined by

p((X t )) = A, X t . From every graduation of type A a graduation of type A is
derived by means of p {Example 2) ; it is called the total graduation associated
with the given "multigraduation" of type A.

The definitions and examples of this no. extend immediately to the case
where G is a group which is not necessarily commutative; it is simply necessary
to replace everywhere the notion of direct sum by that of "restricted sum"
(§ 1, no. 6, Remark). Note that in this case the G„ are normal subgroups of G
and that for X ^ y. every element of G* is permutable with every element
ofG,,.

2. GRADED RINGS AND MODULES

Definition 2. Given a ring A and a graduation (A x ) of type A on the additive group A,
this graduation is said to be compatible with the ring structure on A if

(1) A„A U c A k + Vk for all X, (x in A.

The ring A with this graduation is then called a graded ring of type A.

Proposition 1. If every element of A is cancellable and (A x ) is a graduation of type
A compatible with the structure of a ring A, A is a subring of A {and in particular
leAo).

364



GRADED RINGS AND MODULES §11-2

As A A c A by definition, it suffices to prove that 1 e A . Let 1 = 2-, e h



Kets.



be the decomposition of 1 into its homogeneous components. If x e A^, then
x = x. 1 = Z, xe k ; comparing the components of degree fx, (since \i + X = [i

\e A

implies X = 0) x = xe . Since this relation is true for every homogeneous
element of A, it is true for all x e A; in particular 1 = 1 ,e = e e A .

Definition 3. Let A be a graded ring of type A, (A K ) its graduation and M a left
(resp. right) A-module; a graduation (M x ) of type X on the additive group M is
compatible with the A-module structure on M if

(2) A„Mn c M x+U (resp. M,A c M x+Ii )

jfor a// X, [i in A. The module M with this graduation is then called a left (resp. right)
graded module of type A over the graded ring A.

When the elements of A are cancellable, it follows from (2) and Proposi-
tion 1 that the M x are A -modules.

Clearly if A is a graded ring of type A, the left A-module A s (resp. the right
A-module A d ) is graded of type A.

Examples. (1) On any ring A the trivial graduation of type A is compatible
with the ring structure. If A is graded by the trivial graduation, for a gradua-
tion (M,J of type A on an A-module M to be compatible with the A-module
structure, it is necessary and sufficient that the M x be submodules of M.

(2) Let A be a graded ring of type A, M a graded A-module of type A and
p a homomorphism of A into a commutative monoid A' whose identity element
is denoted by 0. Then A is a graded ring of type A' and M a graded module of
type A' for the graduations of type A' derived from p and the graduations of
type A on A and M by the procedure of no. 1, Example 1 : this follows immedi-
ately from the relation p(X + p.) = p(X) + p((x).

In particular, if A = A x x A 2 is a product of two commutative monoids, the
projections pr x and pr 2 are homomorphisms and the corresponding graduations
are just the partial graduations derived from the graduations of type A (no. 1,
Example 3) ; these partial graduations are thus compatible with the ring struc-
ture of A and the module structure of M.

Similarly, if A = Ao I} (where A is a commutative monoid with identity
element denoted by 0), the total graduation (no. 1, Example 4) of type A de-
rived from the graduation of type A on A (resp. M) by means of the codiagonal
homomorphism is compatible with the ring structure on A (resp. with the
module structure on M).

(3) Let A be a graded ring of type A, M a graded A-module of type A and
X an element of A; for all X e A, let M' x = M x + Xo and let M' be the Z-module

© M' K . As A^M^ &lt;=■ M x + M . Xo = M x + ll , M' is an A-module and the M' K form

365



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

on M' a graduation of type A compatible with the A-module structure of M' ;
the graded A-module M' of type A thus denned is said to be obtained by
shifting by X the graduation of M and it is denoted by M(X ). When A is a
group, the underlying A-module of the graded A-module M' is identified with
M.

*(4) Let B be a commutative ring. The polynomial ring B[X] in one in-
determinate is graded of type N by the subgroups BX n (n ^ 0) (cf. Ill, § 2,
no. 9 and IV). *

*(5) Let B be a commutative ring, E a B-module, Q,a quadratic form on
E and C(Q,) the Clifford algebra of Q, (cf. IX, § 9). The sub-B-modules C + (Q,)
and G~ (Q,) form on C(Q,) a graduation of type Z/2Z compatible with the ring
structure on C(Q,). #

Remarks. (1) The graduations most often used are of type Z or of type Z n ;
when we speak of graded (resp. bigraded, trigraded, etc.) modules and rings
without mentioning the type, it is understood that we mean graduations of
type Z (resp. Z 2 , Z 3 , etc.) ; a graded ring (resp. module) of type N is also called
a graded ring (resp. module) with positive degrees.

(2) The graded Z-modules of type A, when Z has the trivial graduation, are
just the graded commutative groups (whose set of degrees is a commutative
monoid) of Definition 1 (no. 1).

Definition 4. Let A, A' be two graded rings of the same type A and (AJ, (A£) their
respective graduations. A ring homomorphism h: A -&gt; A' is called graded ifh(A K ) cz A' h
for all X e A.

Let M, M' be two graded modules of type A over a graded ring of type A. Let
u : M -&gt; M' be an A-homomorphism and 8 an element of A; u is called graded of degree
8 ifu(M K ) &lt;= M K+5 for all X e A.

Let A be a graded ring of type A, A' a graded ring of type A' and p : A -&gt; A'
a homomorphism. A ring homomorphism h : A -+ A' is called graded if h is a
graded homomorphism of graded rings of type A' when A is given the gradua-
tion of type A' derived from its graduation of type A by means of p (no.
1, Example 2); this therefore means that A(A„) &lt;= Ap W for all X e A.

An A-homomorphism u: M -&gt; M' is called graded if there exists 8 e A such
that u is graded of degree 8. If w ^ and every element of A is cancellable, the
degree 8 of u is then determined uniquely.

If h: A -&gt; A', h'\ A' -&gt; A" are two graded homomorphisms of graded rings
of type A, so is K ° h: A -&gt; A"; for a mapping h: A -» A' to be a graded ring
isomorphism, it is necessary and sufficient that h be bijective and that h and the
inverse mapping h' be graded homomorphisms; it also suffices for this that h
be a bijective graded homomorphism. Thus it is seen that graded homomor-

366



GRADED SUBMODULES § 11.3

phisms can be taken as the morphisms of the species of graded ring structure of
type A (Set Theory, IV, § 2, no. 1).

Similarly, if u: M -+ M' and u' : M' -&gt; M" are two graded homomorphisms
of graded A-modules of type A, of respective degrees 8 and 8', u' o u: M -&gt; M"
is a graded homomorphism of degree 8 + 8'. If 8 admits an inverse — 8 in A
and «: M -&gt; M' is a bijective graded homomorphism of degree 8, the inverse
mapping u' : M' — »■ M is a bijective graded homomorphism of degree — 8. It
follows as above that the graded homomorphisms of degree can be taken as the
morphisms of the species of graded A-module of type A. But a bijective graded
homomorphism u: M-&gt;N of degree #0 is not a graded A-module isomor-
phism if M and N are non-zero and the elements of A are cancellable.

Examples. (6) If M is a graded A-module and M(X ) is a graded A-module ob-
tained by shifting (no. 2, Example 3), the Z-linear mapping of M(X ) into M
which coincides with the canonical injection on each M K+Ko is a graded homo-
morphism of degree X (which is bijective when A is a group).

(7) If a is a homogeneous element of degree 8 belonging to the centre of A,
the homothety x h&gt; ax of any graded A-module M is a graded homomorphism
of degree 8.

Remark (3) A graded A-module M is called a graded free A-module if there exists a
basis (m l ) leI of M consisting of homogeneous elements. Suppose it is and A is a
commutative group; let \ be the degree of m t and consider for each i the shifted
A-module A( — \) (no. 2, Example 3) ; if e t denotes the element 1 of A considered

as an element of degree X, in A( — X t ), the A-linear mapping u : © A( — \) -&gt; M

such that «(* t ) = m, for all i, is a graded A-module isomorphism.

Assuming always that A is a commutative group, now let N be a graded
A-module, (« t )iGi a system of homogeneous generators of N and suppose that w t is
of degree [x t . Then the A-linear mapping v : © A( — [x t ) -&gt; N such that wfo) = n t

for all i is a surjective graded A-module homomorphism of degree 0. If N is a finitely
generated graded A-module, there is always a finite system of homogeneous
generators of N and hence there is a surjective homomorphism of the above
type with 1 finite.



3. GRADED SUBMODULES

Proposition 2. Let Abe a graded ring of type A, M a graded A-module of type A,
(M x ) its graduation and N a sub-A-module ofM. The following properties are equiva-
lent:

(a) N is the sum of the family (N n M x ) XeA .

(b) The homogeneous components of every element qfN belong to N.

(c) N is generated by homogeneous elements.

367



LINEAR ALGEBRA



Every element of N can be written uniquely as a sum of elements of the M x
and hence it is immediate that (a) and (b) are equivalent and that (a) implies
(c). We show that (c) implies (b). Then let (* t ) l6l be a family of homogeneous
generators ^0 of N and let 8(1) be the degree of x t . Every element of N can be

written as Z, a i x K with a l e A; if a t x is the component of a t of degree X, the con-
elusion follows from the relation

Zi, ( /-, a. u x.) = Z, I 2* a l U *J.

Remark ( 1 ) In the above notation, the relation 2, a t * t = is therefore equivalent
to the system of relations 2 a, u * t = 0. When A is a group, these rela-
tions can be written 2 a, „.,«,*. = 0.

iel '

When a submodule N of M has the equivalent properties stated in Proposi-
tion 2, clearly the N n M x form a graduation compatible with the A-module
structure of N, called the graduation induced by that on M; N with this gradua-
tion is called a graded submodule of M.

Corollary 1. If "N is a graded submodule ofM and (x t ) is a generating system o/N,
the homogeneous components of the x^form a generating system ofN.

Corollary 2. IfN is a finitely generated submodule ofM, N admits a finite generating
system consisting of homogeneous elements.

It suffices to apply Corollary 1 noting that an element ofM has only a finite
number of homogeneous components ^ 0.

A graded submodule of A s (resp. A d ) is called a graded left (resp. right) ideal
of the graded ring A. For every subring B of A(B C\ A X )(B n A w ) &lt;= BnA U p
if B is a graded sub-Z-module of A, the graduation induced on B by that on A is
therefore compatible with the ring structure on B; B is then called a graded
subring of A.

Clearly if N (resp. B) is a graded sub-A-module ofM (resp. a graded subring
of A), the canonical injection N^M (resp. B^A) is a graded module
homomorphism of degree (resp. a graded ring homomorphism) .

If N is a graded submodule of a graded A-module M and (M X ) X6A the
graduation of M, the submodules (M„ + N)/N of M/N form a graduation
compatible with the structure of this quotient module. For, if N*. = M K n N,
(M„ + N)/N is identified with M„/N„ and it follows from Proposition 2 and
§ 1, no. 6, formula (26) that M/N is their direct sum. Moreover,

A X (M W + N) c A X M^ + N &lt;= M„ + li + N

and hence A x ((M (i + N)/N) &lt;= (M x + W + N)/N, which establishes our asser-

368



GRADED SUBMODULES § 1 1.3

tion. The graduation ((M*. + N)/N) XgA is called the quotient graduation of that
on M by N and the quotient module M/N with this graduation is called the
graded quotient module of M by the graded submodule N; the canonical homo-
morphism M -&gt; M/N is a graded homomorphism of degree for this gradua-
tion.

If b is a graded two-sided ideal of A, the quotient graduation on A/b is com-
patible with the ring structure on A/b; the ring A/b with this graduation is
called the quotient graded ring of A by b; the canonical homomorphism A -» A/b
is a homomorphism of graded rings for this graduation.

Proposition 3. Let A be a graded ring of type A, M, N two graded A-modules of type
A and a:M-»Na graded A-homomorphism of degree 8. Then :

(i) Im(tt) is a graded submodule ofN.

(ii) If 8 is a regular element of A, Ker(w) is a graded submodule ofM.

(iii) lf$ = 0, the bijection M/Ker(w) -&gt; Im(w) canonically associated with uis an
isomorphism of graded modules.

Assertion (i) follows immediately from the definitions and Proposition 2(c).
If x is an element of M such that u{x) = and x — 2« x K is its decomposition
into homogeneous components (where x K is of degree X), then

2-, u(x h ) = u(x) =

and u(x K ) is of degree X + 8; if 8 is regular the relation X + 8 = fx + 8 implies
X = fx, hence the u(x K ) are the homogeneous components of u(x) and necessarily
u(x k ) = for all X e A, which proves (ii). The bijection v: M/Ker(«) -» Im(«)
canonically associated with u is then a graded homomorphism of degree 8, as
follows from the definition of the quotient graduation; whence (iii) when 8 = 0.

Corollary. Let A, B be two graded rings of type A and u: A -&gt; B a graded homo-
morphism of graded rings. Then Im(u) is a graded submodule ofB, Ker(w) a graded
two-sided ideal of A and the bijection A/Ker(w) -&gt; Im(«) canonically associated with
u is an isomorphism of graded rings.

It suffices to apply Proposition 3 to u considered as a homomorphism of de-
gree of graded Z-modules.

Proposition 4. Let Abe a graded ring of type A and M a graded A-module of type A.

(i) Every sum and every intersection of graded submodules of M is a graded sub-
module.

(ii) If x is a homogeneous element ofMof degree [i which is cancellable in A, the
annihilator of x is a graded left ideal of A.

(iii) If all the elements of A are cancellable ; the annihilator of a graded submodule
of M is a graded two-sided ideal of A.

369



LINEAR ALGEBRA



If (Ni) is a family of graded submodules of M, property (c) of Proposition 2
shows that the sum of the N t is generated by homogeneous elements and
property (b) of Proposition 2 proves that the homogeneous components of

every element of D N t belongs to (I N t ; whence (i).

To prove (ii), it suffices to note that Ann(#) is the kernel of the homo-
morphism a i-&gt; ax of the A-module A s into M and that this homomorphism is
graded of degree y.; the conclusion follows from Proposition 3(ii). Finally (iii)
is a consequence of (i) and (ii) for the annihilator of a graded submodule N of
M is the intersection of the annihilators of the homogeneous elements of N, by
virtue of Proposition 2.

Remark 2. Let M be a graded A-module and E a submodule of M; it follows
from Proposition 4(i) that there exists a largest graded submodule N' of M
contained in E and a smallest graded submodule N" of M containing E ; N' is the
set of x e E all of whose homogeneous components belong to E and N" is the
submodule of M generated by the homogeneous components of a generating
system of E.

Proposition 5. Let A be a graded ring of type A. If every element of A is cancellable,
then, for every homogeneous element aeA, the centralizer of a in A (I, § 1, no. 5) is a
graded subring of A.

Suppose that a is of degree 8; let b = Z b K be an element permutable with
a, b K being the homogeneous component of b of degree X for all X G A. Then by
hypothesis A, (ab^ — b K a) = and ab K - b k a is homogeneous of degree
X + 8; as 8 is cancellable, it follows that ab K = b^a for all X, which proves
our assertion.

Corollary. If every element of A is cancellable, the centralizer of the graded subring
Bo/A (and in particular the centre of A) is a graded subring of A.

It is the intersection of the centralizers of the homogeneous elements of B.

Remark (3) A direct system (A,,, &lt;j&gt; Ba ) of graded rings of type A (resp. a direct system
(M a ,/ Bot ) of graded A^-modules of type A) is a direct system of rings (resp. A^,-
modules) such that each A,, (resp. M a ) is graded of type A and each &lt;j&gt; 3a (resp.
/ Ba ) is a homomorphism of graded rings (resp. an A^-homomorphism of degree of
graded modules). If (A£) XsA (resp. (M£)„ 6A ) be the graduation of A^ (resp. M a )
and we write

A = lim A a , A* = lim A£ (resp. M = Hm M a , M* = lim M£),

a a

it follows from § 6, no. 2, Proposition 5 that (A*) (resp. (M*)) is a graduation
370



CASE OF AN ORDERED GROUP OF DEGREES § 1 1 .4

of A (resp. M) and it follows from I, § 10, nos. 3 and 4 that this graduation is
compatible with the ring structure on A (resp. the A-module structure on M).
The graded ring A (resp. graded A-module M) is called the direct limit of the direct
system of graded rings (A^, &lt;j&gt; Pa ) (resp. graded modules (M^/p,,)). If
4&gt;«: Aa-&gt;A (resp. f n : M a -&gt;M) is the canonical mapping, &lt;|&gt; a (resp.^) is a
homomorphism of graded rings (resp. a homomorphism of degree of graded
A^-modules).

4. CASE OF AN ORDERED GROUP OF DEGREES

An order structure (denoted by &lt;) on a commutative group A written
additively is said to be compatible with the group structure if, for all p e A, the
relation X ^ (x implies X + p ^ fx + p. The group A with this order structure
is then called an ordered group. We shall study these groups in detail in VI, § 1 ;
here we restrict ourselves to the remark that in such a group the relation
X &gt; implies X + [x &gt; fx for all [x, for it implies X + [x ^ |x by definition and
the relation £ + jx = (x is equivalent to £ = 0.

Let A be an ordered commutative group, A a graded ring of type A and (A x )
its graduation and suppose that the relation A K # {0} implies X ^ 0; then it

follows from the definitions that 3 = ^ A x is a graded two-sided ideal of A, by
virtue of the remark made above.

Proposition 6. Let A be an ordered commutative group, A a graded ring of type A,
(A x ) its graduation, M a graded A-module of type A and (M x ) its graduation. Suppose
that the relation A K ^ {0} implies X ^ and that there exists X such that M Xo ^ {0}

and M x = {0}for X &lt; X . Then, if3 = 2 A k , S M ^ M.

Let a: be a non-zero element of M Xo ; suppose that x e 3 M. Then x = zi, a { x { ,

where the a K are homogeneous elements #0 of 9 and the x t homogeneous
elements #0 of M with deg(*) = deg(^) + deg(* f ) for all i (no. 2). But, as
deg(aj) &gt; 0, X = deg(a,) + degfo) &gt; deg(* 4 ), which contradicts the hypo-
thesis.

Corollary 1. With the hypotheses on A and A of Proposition 6, if M is a finitely
generated graded A-module such that 3 M = M, then M = {0}.

Suppose M # {0}. Let Xq be a minimal element of the set of degrees of a
finite generating system of M consisting of homogeneous elements #0; then
the hypotheses of Proposition 6 would be fulfilled, which implies a contradic-
tion.

Corollary 2. With the hypotheses on A and A of Proposition 6, let M be a finitely

371



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

generated graded A-module and N a graded submodule ofM. such that N + 3 M = M;
then N = M.

M/N is a finitely generated graded A-module and the hypothesis implies that

3 .(M/N) = M/N; hence M/N = 0.

Corollary 3. With the hypotheses on A and A of Proposition 6, let u:M.^&gt;N be a
graded homomorphism of graded right A-modules, where N is assumed to be finitely
generated. If the homomorphism

u 1 : M (g) A (A/So) -&gt; N ® A (A/3 )

is surjective, then u is surjective.

m(M) is a graded submodule of N and the (A/3 )-module

(N/«(M)) ® A (A/3 )

is isomorphic to (N &lt;g&gt; A (A/3 ))/Im(u &lt;g&gt; 1) (§ 3, no. 6, Proposition 6). The
hypothesis therefore implies (N/w(M)) ® A (A/3 ) = and hence N = w(M)
by Corollary 1.

Remark. It follows from the proof of Corollary 1 that Corollaries 1 and 2
(resp. Corollary 3) are still valid when, instead of assuming that M (resp. N)
is finitely generated, the following hypothesis is made: there exists a subset
A + of A satisfying the following conditions :

(1) for a£A + , M * = {0} (resp. N„ = {0});

(2) every non-empty subset of A + has a least element.

This will be the case if A = Z and M (resp. N) is a graded module with
positive degrees.

Proposition 7. Suppose that A = Z. With the hypotheses on A and M of Proposition
6, consider the graded A -module N = M/3 M and suppose the following conditions
hold:

(i) each of the N x considered as an A -module admits a basis (y t x) te i*/

(ii) the canonical homomorphism 3 A M-&gt;M« injective.

Then M is a graded free A-module (no. 2, Remark 3) and, to be precise, ifx a is an
element ofM K whose image in N x isy iK , the family (*i0a, wei (where lis the set the sum
of the I,J is a basis ofM..

We know (no. 2, Remark 3) that there is a graded free A-module L (of
graduation (LJ) and a surjective homomorphism /&gt;:L-&gt;M of degree
such that p(e lk ) = x lK for all (i, x ) e I ((e lX ) (lf v el being a basis of L consisting
of homogeneous elements e lK e L. K ) . It follows from the above Remark that p is
surjective. Consider the graded A-module R = Ker(/&gt;) and note that R x = {0}
for X &lt; X by definition; we need to prove that R = {0} and by Proposition 6

372



CASE OF AN ORDERED GROUP OF DEGREES § 1 1.4

it will suffice to show that 3 R = R. Consider the commutative diagram (§ 3,
no. 6, Proposition 5)

3 (2&gt;R-^ 3 OL-^ 3o®M &gt;0



&gt; R &gt; L &gt; M &gt;

/ p

where j is the canonical injection, a, b, c deriving from the canonical injection
3 -&gt; A (§ 3, no. 4, Proposition 4) ; it must be shown that a is surjective. Note
that, as L is free, b is injective (§ 3, no. 7, Corollary 6 to Proposition 7) and c
is injective by hypothesis. Then let t be an element of R and t its class in
R/3 R; then there is an exact sequence (§ 3, no. 6, Proposition 5 and Corollary
2 to Proposition 6)

R/3 R -U L/3 L -^&gt; M/3 M — &gt;

where j and p derive from j and p when passing to the quotients and p is by
hypothesis a bijection; then j(t) = 0, in other words j(t) e 3 L. Then there is
an element zg3 ®L such thatj(0 = K z ) 5 a*P(K z )) = °» c (( l ® P) (z)) =
and, as c is injective, (1 ® p)(z) = 0. In other words, z is the image of an ele-
ment t'e3 Q ®R under 1 ja,ndthenj(a(t')) = b(z) = j (t) ; asj is injective,
this implies t = a{t').

We shall show later {Commutative Algebra, II, § 3, no. 2, Proposition 5) how
this proposition can be extended to non-graded modules.

Lemma 1 . For a commutative group A to be such that there exists on La total ordering
compatible with the group structure of A, it is necessary and sufficient that A be torsion-free.

If there exists such an order structure on A and if X &gt; 0, then X + [i &gt;
for all (x ^ and in particular, by induction on the integer n &gt; 0, n.X &gt; 0,
which proves that A is torsion-free (since every element ^0 of A is either &gt;0
or &lt; 0). Conversely, if A is torsion-free, A is a sub-Z-module of a vector Q,-space
(§ 7, no. 10, Corollary 1 to Proposition 26) which may be assumed of the
form Q, (I) ; if I is given a well-ordering (Set Theory, III, § 2, no. 3, Theorem 1)
and Q, its usual ordering, the set Q, (I) with the lexicographical ordering is totally
ordered (Set Theory, III, § 2, no. 6) ; it is immediate that this ordering is com-
patible with the additive group structure of Q, {1) .

Proposition 8. Let A be a torsion-free commutative group and A a graded ring of type
A. If the product in A of two homogeneous elements #0 is ^0, the ring A has no divisor
0/0.

Let A be given a total ordering compatible with its group structure (Lemma

373



LINEAR ALGEBRA



1) and let x = A, x K ,y — 2-, y K be two non-zero elements of A (x x and y %

being homogeneous of degree X for all X e A) ; let a (resp. (3) be the greatest of
the elements X 6 A such that x k # (resp. y k # 0) ; it is immediate that if
X ^ a or (x # [3, either x^ = or deg(# x y u ) &lt; a + (3; the homogeneous
component of xy of degree a + [3 is therefore x a y^, which is non-zero by
hypothesis; whence xy ^ 0.

5. GRADED TENSOR PRODUCT OF GRADED MODULES

Let A be a commutative monoid with its identity element denoted by 0, A a
graded ring of type A and M (resp. N) a graded right (resp. left) A-module of
type A. Let (A x ) (resp. (M x ), (N x )) be the graduation of A (resp. M, N) ; the
tensor product M (g) z N of the Z-modules M and N is the direct sum of the
M x (g) z N^ (§ 3, no. 7, Proposition 7) and hence the latter form a bigradua-
tion of types A, A on this Z-module. Consider on M &lt;g) z N the total graduation of
type A associated with this bigraduation (no. 1, Example 4); it consists of the

sub-Z-modules P»= i (M u &lt;g), N v ). It is known that the Z-module

U + v = X v *

M &lt;2&gt; A N is the quotient of M ® z N by the sub-Z-module Q, generated by the
elements (xa) ®y - x ®{ay), where xeM,yeN and a e A (§ 3, no. 1) ; if,
for all X e A, x K , y K , a K are the homogeneous components of degree X of x, y, a
respectively, clearly (xa) ®y — x &lt;g) (zy) is the sum of the homogeneous ele-
ments (%a v ) ® y» - x K &lt;g&gt; (flvyj, in other words Q,is a graded sub-Z-module of
M ® z N (no. 3, Proposition 2) and the quotient

M® A N = (M&lt;g&gt; z N)/Q,

therefore has canonically a graded Z-module structure of type A (no. 3). More-
over (no. 3, Proposition 5), the centre G of A is a graded subring of A; the
graduation which we have just defined on M ® A N is compatible with its module
structure over the graded ring C. For M &lt;g) z N has canonically two G-module
structures, for which respectively c (x ®y) = (xc) Oy and (* &lt;g&gt;y)c = x &lt;g&gt; (cy)
for x e M, y e N, c e G (§ 3, no. 3) ; if x e M„, y e N w , c e G n A v , the two ele-
ments c(x &lt;8&gt;y) and (x ®y)c belong to (M &lt;g&gt; z N) x+u+v and their difference
belongs to Q, and hence their common image in M &lt;g) A N belongs to
(M ® A N) x+li+v , which establishes our assertion. When we speak of M &lt;g) A N
as a graded G-module, we always mean with the structure thus defined, unless
otherwise mentioned. Note that (M ® A N) x can be defined as the additive
group of M &lt;g) A N generated by the x^ ® y„ where x B e Mu, y y e N v and
(x + v = X.

Let M' (resp. N') be another graded right (resp. left) A-module and
u: M -&gt; M', &amp;: N -&gt; N' graded homomorphisms of respective degrees a and p.
Then it follows immediately from the above remark that u ® v is a graded
(C-module) homomorphism of degree a + (3.

374



GRADED MODULES OF GRADED HOMOMORPHISMS §11.6

When A is commutative, a graduation (compatible with the A-module
structure) is similarly defined on the tensor product of any finite number of
graded A-modules; it is moreover immediate that the associativity isomor-
phisms such as (M ® N) &lt;g) P -&gt; M ® (N &lt;g) P) (§ 3, no. 8, Proposition 8) are
isomorphisms of graded modules.

Remark. When A has the trivial graduation (no. 1, Example 1), (M &lt;g&gt; A N) K
is then simply the direct sum of the sub-Y-modules M u ® A N v of M ® A N
such that (X + v = X.

Let M (resp. N) be a graded right (resp. left) A-module of type A, P a
graded Z-module of type A and let/ be a Z-bilinear mapping of M x N into
P satisfying condition (1) of § 3, no. 1, and such moreover that

f( x \&gt; yj eP x+u for * x e M K , y» e N„, X, (x in A.

Then/(*, y) = g(x ® y), where £:M® A N-&gt;Pisa Z-linear mapping (§ 3,
no. 1, Proposition 1) and it follows from the above condition that g is a graded
Z-module homomorphism of degree 0.

Let B be another graded ring of type A and p:A-&gt;Ba homomorphism of
graded rings (no. 2) ; then p* (B d ) is a graded right A-module of type A. If E is a
graded left A-module of type A and p*(B d ) ® A E is given the graded Z-
module structure of type A defined above, the canonical left B-module struc-
ture (§ 5, no. 1) is compatible with the graduation of

E (B) = p*(E) = P# (B d )&lt;g&gt; A E.

The graded B-module thus obtained is said to be obtained by extending the
ring of scalars to B by means of p and when we speak of E (B) or p* (E) as a graded
B-module, we always mean this structure, unless otherwise mentioned.

6. GRADED MODULES OF GRADED HOMOMORPHISMS

We suppose in this no. that the monoid A is a group. Let A be a graded ring of
type A and M, N two graded left (for example) A-modules of type A. Let H„
denote the additive group of graded homomorphisms of degree X of M into N (no.
2) ; in the additive group Hom A (M, N) of all homomorphisms of M into N
(with the non-graded A-module structures) the sum (for XeA) of the H x is

direct. For, if there is a relation 2, u K = with u K e H^ for all X, it follows that
Z u K (x u ) = for all ^ and all x u e M„. As the elements of A are cancellable,

"xW is the homogeneous component of 2, u^xj of degree X + (x; hence
«*(*u) = ° for every ordered pair (jx, X) and every x # e M u , which implies
m x = for all XeA. We shall denote (in this paragraph) by Homgr A (M, N) the
additive subgroup of Hom A (M, N) the sum of the H„ and we shall call it the
additive group of graded A-module homomorphisms of M into N. Let G be the

375



LINEAR ALGEBRA



centre of A, which is a graded subring (no. 3, Corollary to Proposition 5) ; for
the canonical C-module structure on Hom A (M, N) (§ 1, no. 14, Remark 1),
Homgr A (M, N) is a submodule and the graduation (H x ) is compatible with the C-
module structure : for, if c v e G n A v , x u e N w and u K e H^, then by definition
(*v«x)(*ii) = &lt;V M x(*u) c N x + u + v and hence c v w„ eH Uv .

Let M' and N' be two graded left A-modules of type A and u' : M' -&gt; M,
»' : N — &gt; N' graded homomorphisms of respective degrees a and (3. Then it
is immediate that Hom(u', v'): w t-&gt;v' ° w o u' maps Homgr A (M, N) into
Homgr A (M', N') and that its restriction to Homgr A (M, N) is a graded homo-
morphism into Homgr A (M', N') of degree a + (3.

In particular Homgr A (M, M) is a graded subring of End A (M), which is de-
noted by Endgr A (M).

Remark. If M and N are graded left A-modules, Homgr A (M, N) is in general
distinct from Hom A (M, N). However these two sets are equal when M is a
finitely generated A-module. For M is then generated by a finite number of
homogeneous elements x { (1 ^ i &lt; n); let d(i) be the degree of x { ; let
u e Hom A (M, N) and for all X e A let z {&gt; x denote the homogeneous component
of u(x t ) of degree X + d(i). We show that there exists a homomorphism

u x : M -&gt; N such that u^{x^) = z {&gt; ^ for all i. It suffices to prove that if Z, a^ =

with flj e A for 1 ^ i ^ «, then 2-, a t z u K = for all X e A (§ 1, no. 7, Remark).

It can be assumed that each a t is homogeneous of degree d'{i) such that

c?(z) + d'{i) — [i for all i (no. 3, Remark 1); then .2, fliM^) = 0; taking the

homogeneous component of degree X + [i on the left-hand side, we obtain

zL, a x z it x = 0, whence the existence of the homomorphism u k ; clearly moreover

u K is graded of degree X. Finally, u K = except for a finite number of values of X,

and u = 2-, u K by definition, which proves our assertion.

In particular, Homgr A (A s , M) = Hom A (A s , M) for every graded left A-
module M; moreover Hom A (A s , M) has a graded left A-module structure (and
not just a graded C-module structure), and it is immediate that with this
structure the canonical mapping of M into Hom A (A s , M) (§1, no. 14, Remark
2) is a graded A-module isomorphism.

Similarly, Homgr A (M, A s ) has a graded right A-module structure (and not
only a graded C-module structure) ; it is called the graded dual of the graded
A-module M and is denoted by M* 8r , or simply M* when no confusion results.
If u: M -*• N is a graded homomorphism of degree 8, it follows from the above
that the restriction to N* gr of % u = Hom(u, l Ag ) is a graded homomorphism of
the graded dual N* 8r into the graded dual M* er , of degree 8, called the graded
transpose of u.

376



GRADED MODULES OF GRADED HOMOMORPHISMS §H-6

We sometimes consider on the graded dual M* gv the graduation derived
from the above with the aid of the isomorphism X h-»- — X of A (no. 1, Example
2) so that the homogeneous elements of degree X in M* gr are the graded
linear forms of degree — X on M (when A has the trivial graduation, these
are the zero linear forms of the M u of index y. ^ X). Then, if u: M -&gt; N is a
graded homomorphism of degree 8, u' becomes a graded homomorphism of
degree — 8.

Suppose A is commutative and graded of type A and let M, N, P, Q be four
graded A-modules of type A. Then there are canonical graded homomorphisms of
degree

(3) Homgr A (M, Homgr A (N, P)) -&gt; Homgr A (M &lt;g&gt; A N, P)

(4) Homgr A (M 5 N) ® A P -&gt; Homgr A (M, N &lt;g&gt; A P)

(5) Homgr A (M, P) &lt;g&gt; A Homgr A (N, Q) -» Homgr A (M &lt;g) A N, P ® A Q,)

(the tensor products being given the graduations defined in no. 5) obtained by
restricting the canonical homomorphisms defined in § 4, nos. 1, 2 and 4; for,
if u : M -&gt; Homgr A (N, P) is graded of degree 8, then, for all x e M^, u(x) is a
graded homomorphism N -&gt; P of degree S + X and hence, for y e N^,
u(x)(y) eP 5 + Ull ; ifa:M ® A N -&gt; P corresponds canonically to u, it is then
seen that v is a graded homomorphisms of degree 8, whence our assertion con-
cerning (3) ; moreover it is seen that this homomorphism is bijective. The argu-
ment is similar for (4) and (5).

If in particular P = Q, = A in (5), then there is a canonical graded homo-
morphism of degree

(6) M** r ® A N* gr -&gt; (M ® A N) * gv .



377



APPENDIX

PSEUDOMODULES



1. ADJUNCTION OF A UNIT ELEMENT TO A PSEUDO-RING

Let A be a pseudo-ring (I, § 8, no. 1). On the set A' = Z x A we define the
following laws of composition :

'(m, a) + (n, b) = (m + n, a + b)



1 (m, a)(n, b) = {mn, mb + na + ab).

It is immediately verified that A' with these two laws of composition is a
ring in which the element (1,0) is the unit element. The set {0} x A is a two-
sided ideal of A' and i : x h&gt; (0, x) is an isomorphism of the pseudo-ring A onto
the sub-pseudo-ring {0} x A by means of which A and {0} x A are identified.
A' is called the ring derived from the pseudo-ring A by adjoining a unit element.

If A already has an identity element s, the element e = (0, s) of A' is an
idempotent belonging to the centre of A' and such that

A = eh' = A'e.

Then (eA', (l-^)A') is a direct decomposition (I, § 8, no. 11) of A' and
the ring (1 — e)A' is isomorphic to Z.

2. PSEUDOMODULES

Given a pseudo-ring A with or without a unit element, a left pseudomodule over
A is a commutative group E (written additively) admitting A as set of operators
and satisfying axioms (MJ, (M n ) and (M m ) of § 1, no. 1, Definition 1. Right
pseudomodules over A are defined similarly.

Let A' be the ring obtained by adjoining a unit element to A. If E is a left
pseudomodule over A, a left A' -module structure on E is associated with it by
writing, for all x e E and every element (n, a) e A',

(2) (n, a) .x = nx + ax.

Axioms (M z ) to (M IV ) of § 1, no. 1, Definition 1 are immediately verified;

378



APPENDIX



moreover, by restricting the set of operators of this module structure to {0} x A
(identified with A), we obtain on E the pseudomodule structure given initially.

For a subset M of E to be a subgroup with operators of the pseudomodule
E (in which case the induced structure is obviously also a left pseudomodule
structure over A), it is necessary and sufficient that M be a submodule of the
associated A'-module E and this sub-A'-module is associated with the pseudo-
module M. Moreover, the quotient A'-module E/M is then associated with the
quotient group with operators E/M, which is obviously a pseudomodule over A.

If E, F are two pseudomodules over A, the homomorphisms E -*» F of
groups with operators are identical with the A'-linear mappings E -&gt; F of the
A'-modules associated respectively with the pseudomodules E and F. If
(E t ) ie i is a family of pseudomodules over A, the groups with operators

II E and E t are pseudomodules over A and the associated A'-modules are

respectively the product and direct sum of the associated A'-modules E t . There
are analogous results for inverse and direct limits of pseudomodules. The
theory of pseudomodules over A can thus be entirely reduced to that of A'-
modules.



379



EXERCISES



§1

1. Let E, F be two A-modules and a:E-»Fa linear mapping. Let M be a
submodule of E, N a submodule of F, i: M -&gt; E the canonical injection and
^:F-&gt;F/N the canonical surjection. Show that u(M)=Im(uoi) and

u (N) = Ker(q o u).

2. Let E be a left A-module; for every left ideal a of A let aE denote the sum
of the ax where x e E, which is therefore a submodule of E.

(a) Show that for every family (E k ) x e L of A-modules, a . (d3 E^ is canonically

identified with © aE x .

(b) If o is a finitely generated left ideal of A, show that for every family
(Ex,)\eL°f A-modules, o. 1 1 E K is canonically identified with 1 1 aE x . Give an

example where a is not finitely generated and the above property fails to hold
(take A commutative and all the E^, equal to A).

* (c) Let K be a commutative field, A the ring K[X, Y] of polynomials in
two indeterminates over K, m = AX and n = AY. If E is the quotient A-
module of A 2 by the submodule of A 2 generated by X&lt;?j — Ye 2 (where (e X) e 2 )
is the canonical basis of A 2 ), show that (m n n)E # (mE) r&gt; (nE).*

3. Let E be an A-module.

(a) Let (L ll ) weM be a family of right directed ordered sets and, for all
(x e M, let {F Xil )xetv be an increasing family of submodules of E. Show that



n ( 2 f J = 2 ( n f^ x



(b) Take A to be a field and E the A-module A N ; let G be the submodule
A (N) of E; on the other hand, for every finite subset H of N, let F H be the sub-

380



EXERCISES



module Yl M n of E, where M n = A for n $ H and M n = for n e H. Show

neN

that the family (F H ), where H runs throughout the set O of finite subsets of N
is right directed and that

(=Cl F =) + G *,£.&lt;*= + G &gt;-

4. Let E, F l5 F 2 be three A-modules and f x : ¥ x -&gt; E, f 2 : F 2 -&gt; E two A-
linear mappings. The fibre product of F x and F 2 relative to f x and f 2 is the
submodule of the product F x x F 2 consisting of the ordered pairs (x x , x 2 ) such
thatf x (x x ) = f 2 {x 2 ) ; it is denoted by F x x E F 2 .

(a) For every ordered pair of A-linear mappings i^: G-^Fu u 2 : G-»F 2
such that f x °u x = f 2 o w 2 , there exists one and only one A-linear mapping
u: G -&gt; F x x E F 2 such that p x o U = u X) p 2 °u = h 2 , where /&gt;! and /&gt; 2 denote
the restrictions to F x x E F 2 of the projections pr x and pr 2 .

(b) Let E', Fi, F 2 be three A-modules, f[ : Fi -&gt; E',/ 2 ': F 2 -&gt; E' A-Hnear
mappings and Fi x K F 2 the fibre product relative to these mappings. For
every system of A-linear mappings v x : F x -&gt; Fi, t&gt; 2 : F 2 -&gt; F 2 , a&gt; : E -» E' such
that// o^ = w 0/^/2 ov 2 = w°f 2 , let be the A-linear mapping of F x x E F 2
into Fi x E , F 2 corresponding to the two linear mappings v x o p x and v 2 °p 2 .
Show that if v x and y 2 are injective, so is v; give an example where v x and o 2 are
surjective but v is not surjective (take E' = {0}). If w is injective and v x and v 2
surjective, show that v is surjective.

5. Let E, F l5 F 2 be three A-modules and/ : E -* F x ,f x : E -&gt; F 2 two linear
mappings. The amalgamated sum of F x and F 2 relative to/ x and/ 2 is the quotient
module of F x x F 2 by the submodule the image of E under the mapping
z •-*■ (/i( z )j ~/2( z )) 5 ^ is denoted by F x © E F 2 .

(a) For every ordered pair of A-linear mappings u x : F x -» G, m 2 : F 2 -&gt; G
such that u x o/ x = u 2 o/ 2 , show that there exists one and only one A-linear
mapping u: F x © E F 2 -&gt; G such that u o j\ = m x , aoj 2 = m 2) where j x and j 2
denote the respective compositions of the canonical mapping

F x x F 2 ^F 1 e B F 2

with the canonical injections F x -»■ F x x F 2 , F 2 -&gt; F x x F 2 .

(6) Let E', Fi, F 2 be three A-modules,/!': E'-»-Fi,/ a ': E'^F 2 two A-
linear mappings and Fi © E , F 2 the amalgamated sum relative to these map-
pings. For every system of A-linear mappings v x :F' x -&gt;F x , p 2 :F 2 -&gt;F 2 ,
w: E' -&gt; E such that v x of[ =f lOW , v 2 o/ 2 =f 2 o W , let v be the A-linear
mapping of Fi © E , F 2 into F x © E F 2 corresponding to the two linear mappings
j\ o v x andj 2 o v 2 . Show that if v x and v 2 are surjective, so is v; give an example
where v x and v 2 are injective but z; is not injective. Show that if w is surjective
and v x and v 2 injective, then v is injective.

381



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

6. Given an A-module E, let y(E) denote the least of the cardinals of the
generating systems of E.

(a) If -&gt; E -&gt;■ F -&gt; G -&gt; is an exact sequence of A-modules, then

y(G) ^ y(F) ^ y(E) + y(G).

Give an example of a product F = E x G such that y(E) = y(F) = y(G) = 1
(take E and G to be quotients of Z).

(b) If E is the sum of a family (F,J XeL of submodules, then y(E) ^ 2* y(FJ.

(c) If M and N are submodules of a module E, show that

sup(y(M), y(N)) ^ y(M n N) + y(M + N).

7. (a) Let A be a ring and E an (A, A)-bimodule; on the product
B = A x E a ring structure is defined by setting

(a, x) (a' } x') = {aa\ ax' + xa') ;

E (canonically identified with {0} x E) is then a two-sided ideal of B such that
E 2 = {0}.

(b) By suitably choosing A and E, show that E can be a left B-module with
y(E) (Exercise 6) an arbitrary cardinal, although y(B s ) = 1.

*8. Let A be a commutative ring, B = A[X n ] n&gt;1 a polynomial ring over A
in an infinity of indeterminates and G the quotient ring of B by the ideal
generated by the polynomials (X x — X 2 )Xj for i ^ 3. If £ x and £ 2 are the
classes in C of Xj and X 2 respectively, show that the intersection in C of the
monogenous ideals C^j and C£ 2 is not a finitely generated ideal. *

9. Show that in an A-module E, if (F n ) n&gt;1 is a strictly increasing sequence of
finitely generated submodules, the submodule F of E the union of the F n is not
finitely generated. Deduce that if E is an A-module which is not finitely
generated, there exists a submodule F of E such that y(F) = N ( = Card(N)).

10. Let E be a Z-module the direct sum of two submodules M, N respec-
tively isomorphic to Z/2Z and Z/3Z; show that there exists no other decom-
position of E as a direct sum of two non-zero submodules.

11. Let A be a ring admitting a field of left fractions (I, § 9, Exercise 15).
Show that in the A-module A s , a submodule distinct from A s and {0} admits no
supplementary submodule (cf. I, § 9, Exercise 16).

12. Let G be a module and E, F two submodules such that E &lt;= F.

(a) If F is a direct factor of G, F/E is a direct factor of G/E. If also E is a
direct factor of F, E is a direct factor of G.

(b) If E is a direct factor of G, then E is a direct factor of F. If also F/E is a
direct factor of G/E, then F is a direct factor in G.

382



EXERCISES

(c) Give an example of two submodules M, N of the Z-module E = Z 2
such that M and N are direct factors of E but M + N is not a direct factor of E.

(d) Let p be a prime number and U p the submodule of the Z-module Q,/Z
consisting of the classes mod Z of rational numbers of the form kjp n (k e Z,
tigN). Let E be the product Z-module M x N, where M and N are both
isomorphic to U p , M and N being canonically identified with submodules of E.
Consider the endomorphism u: (x,y) *-*■ (x,y + px) of E; show that u is bi-
jective. If M' = «(M), show that M and M' are both direct factors of E but
that M n M' is not a direct factor of E (use (b), showing that the Z-module U p
has no direct factor other than itself and {0}).

^f 13. Let E be an A-module and B the ring End A E. Show that for an element
ueB the following three conditions are equivalent: (1) Bm is a direct factor of
the left B-module B s ; (2) mB is a direct factor of the right B-module B d ; (3)
Ker(«) and Im(u) are direct factors of the A-module E. (Observe that every
left ideal which is a direct factor of B s is of the form Bp, where p is a projector
in E; cf. I, § 8, Exercise 12 and use II, § 1, no. 9, Corollaries 1 and 2 to Proposi-
tion 15.)

14. Let L be a well-ordered set, E an A-module and (E x ) XeIj an increasing
family of submodules of E such that: (1) there exists a X e L such that E = {0};
(2) E is the union of the E x for X e L; (3) if X e L is such that the set of jz &lt; X
admits a greatest element X', E x is the direct sum E v and a submodule F x ;
(4) if X £ L is the least upper bound of the set of [i &lt; X, then E x is the union of
the E w for jji &lt; X. Under these conditions, show that E is the direct sum of the
Fa,. (Prove by transfinite induction that each E x is the direct sum of the F u such
that (jl ^ X.)

H 15. Let c be an infinite cardinal.

(a) Let I be a set and R \a, b\ a relation between elements of I such that
for all a e I the set of (3 6 1 for which Rja, (3j holds has cardinal ^ c. Show that
there exists a well-ordered set L and an increasing family (LJx 6li of subsets of
I such that: (1) there exists a X e L such that I x = ; (2) I is the union of the
I K for X g L; (3) if X e L is such that the set of p &lt; X has a greatest element X',
Card(I x — I v ) &lt; c; (4) if X e L is the least upper bound of the set of p, &lt; X,
I K is the union of the 1^ for (x &lt; X; (5) if a e I x and Rja, (3| holds, then (3 e I v
(Note first that for all a e I the set of (3 e I for which there exists an integer n
and a sequence (yy)i&lt;/&lt; n °f elements of I such that yi = a, y n = (3 and
RJYy, Yy+ii holds for 1 &lt; j ' ^ n — 1, has cardinal ^ c. Then construct the I K by
transfinite induction.)

(b) Let E be an A-module the direct sum of a family (M a ) aeI of submodules
such that Y(M a ) ^ c for all a e I (cf. Exercise 6). Let/be an endomorphism of
E. Show that there exists a well-ordered set L and an increasing family
(I&gt;J\eL of subsets of I satisfying properties (1), (2), (3) and (4) of (a) and such

383



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

moreover that if we write E K = © M a , then/(E x ) c E v (Apply (a) to the

relation Rja, p|: "there exists x e M a such that the component of/(*) in M B
is 5*0".) For all X e L such that the set of (/. &lt; X has a greatest element X',

write F x = © M a . Show that E is the direct sum of the F K (apply Exercise
14). a6l "" IV

(c) With the hypotheses and notation of (b), suppose further that f is a
projector and write P = /(E). Let P K = P n E K ; show that if X £ L is such that
the set of \i &lt; X has a greatest element X', P v is a direct factor of P^ (cf. Exer-
cise 12), that a supplementary submodule P' K of P v in P^ is isomorphic to a direct
factor of F^ and that y(P£) ^ c. Show that P is the direct sum of the P^ (apply
Exercise 14).

(d) Deduce from (c) that if an A-module E is the direct sum of a family
(M a ) a6l of submodules such that y(M a ) &lt; c, then every direct factor P of E is
also the direct sum of a family (N^) XeL of submodules such that y(N K ) ^ c.

16. Let A be a ring such that there exists an A-module M with a generating
system of n elements but containing a free system of n + 1 elements.

(a) Show that there exists in A" a free system of n + 1 elements.

(b) Deduce that there exists in M an infinite free system (construct such a
system by induction using {a)).

(c) Let C be a ring, E the free C-module Of , (&lt;?„) its canonical basis and A
the endomorphism ring of E. Let u x and u 2 denote the endomorphisms of E
defined by the conditions u x {e 2n ) = e n , u x {e 2n + 1 ) = 0, u 2 (e 2n + 1 ) = e n ,
M a(*2n) = f° r au w ^ 0. Show that u x and u 2 form a basis of the A-module A s
and deduce that in the A-module A s there exist infinite free systems.

*(d) Let A be the tensor algebra of a vector space E of dimension &gt;2 over
a commutative field (cf. Ill, § 5, no. 1). Show that in the A-module A s there
exist infinite free systems (observe that two linearly independent vectors in E
are linearly independent in A„ and use (b)). On the other hand, for every
integer n &gt; 0, every basis of the A-module A" has n elements (cf. § 7, no. 2,
Proposition 3). +

17. Let Abe a ring.

(a) Show that if the A-module A" is isomorphic to no A" for m &gt; n, then,
for all p &lt; n, Af is isomorphic to no Af for q &gt; p.

(b) Show that if the A-module A" contains no free system of n + 1 elements,
the A-module Af contains no free system of p + 1 elements for p &lt; n.

18. Let A be a ring for which there exists an integer p with the following
property: for every family (a t ) 1&lt;i&lt;p of p elements of A, there exists a family
i c i)i&lt;i&lt;p of elements of A, one at least of which is not a right divisor of 0, such

p

that 2* c,a, = 0.
384



EXERCISES

(a) Show, by induction on n, that for every family (x t ) of/&gt; n elements of A£,
there exists a family (c s ) ofp n elements of A, one at least of which is not a right

divisor of 0, such that 2L, CjXj — 0.

(b) Deduce from (a) and Exercise 16 that for all n &gt; 0, the A-module A"
contains no free system of n + 1 elements.

19. Let A be a non-zero ring with no divisors of zero.

(a) Show that for n &gt; 1, the A-module A* is not monogenous.

(b) Given an integer n ^ 1, for the A-module AJ to contain no free system
of n + 1 elements, it is necessary that A admit a field of left fractions (I, § 9,
Exercise 15) ; conversely, if this condition is satisfied, A" contains a free system
of n + 1 elements for no integer n &gt; 0. (Use Exercises 17 and 18 and I, § 9,
Exercise 16.)

(c) Show that if every left ideal of A is monogenous, A admits a field of left
fractions (use (a) and I, § 9, Exercise 16).

20. (a) Let A be a ring admitting a field of left fractions (I, § 9, Exercise 15).
Let E be an A-module; show that, if in E (*i)i &lt;i&lt;r is a free system and y, z
two elements such that x 1} ..., x„ y on the one hand and * l5 . . . , x r , z on the
other are two related systems, then x 2 , . . . , x r , y, z is a related system.

(b) Let A be the quotient ring Z/6Z and let (e ls e 2 ) be the canonical basis
of A 2 ; show that if a = 2e ± + 3e 2i a and e x form a related system, as do a and e 2i
although ex and e 2 form a free system.

21. Let A be a ring, b, c two elements of A which are not right divisors of 0,
M the A-module A/ Abe and N the submodule Ac/ Abe of M. For N to be a
direct factor in M, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist two elements
x, y of A such that xb + cy = 1 . (If s is the class of 1 in M, show that a supple-
mentary subspace of N in M is generated by an element of the form (1 — yc)z
whose annihilator is the ideal Ac.)

22. If an A-module E admits a basis whose indexing set is I and one of the
two sets A, I is infinite, show that E is equipotent to A x I.

23. (a) Let M, N be two subsets of an A-module E and m and n their
annihilators; show that the annihilator of M n N contains m + n and give an
example where it is distinct from m + n.

(b) In a product module 1 1 E„ the annihilator of a subset F is the inter-
section of the annihilators of its projections.

(c) In a free A-module, the annihilator of an element #0 contains only left
divisors of in A; in particular, if A is a ring with no divisors of 0, every element
#0 of a free module is free.

385



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

24. Let E be an A-module and M, N two submodules of E. The transporter
of M into N, denoted by N : M, is the set of a e A such that aM cz N ; it is a two-
sided ideal of A, equal to Ann((M + N)/N).

(o) Let A be a commutative ring, M an A-module, N a sub-module of M
and x an element of M; show that N n A* = (N:A*)a\

(b) Let A be a commutative ring and a, b two ideals of A. Show that
o:b =&gt; a and that (a:b)l&lt;x is an A-module isomorphic to Hom(A/b, A/a).

25. Let E, F be two A-modules and «:E-&gt;Fa linear mapping. Show that
the mapping (x, y) i-&gt; (x,y — u(x)) of the product module E x F to itself is
an automorphism of E x F. Deduce that if there exists a linear mapping
v: F -&gt; E and an a e E such that v(u(a)) = a, there exists an automorphism w
of E x F such that w(a, 0) = (0, u(a)).

26. Let E be a free A-module with a basis containing at least two elements.

(a) Show that every semi-linear mapping of E into itself (relative to an
automorphism of A) which permutes with all the automorphisms of E, is
necessarily a homothety x ^ coc (cue A).

(b) Deduce from (a) that the centre of End A (E) is the ring of central homo-
theties, isomorphic to the centre of A.

(c) Deduce from (a) that the centre of the group GL(E) is the group of
invertible central homotheties of E, which is isomorphic to the multiplicative
group of invertible elements of the centre of A.

27. Let A be a commutative ring. Show that if an ideal 3 of A is a free
A-module, then 3 is a monogenous A-module (in other words a principal ideal) .
Give an example showing that the proposition does not extend to the left
ideals in a non-commutative ring (Exercise 16).

§2

1 . (a) If A is a ring with no divisors of zero, show that every element ^ of a
projective A-module is free.

(b) Give an example of a projective A-module whose annihilator is non-zero
(cf. I, §8, no. 11).

(c) Show that the Z-module Q, is not a projective Z-module. * (See Commu-
tative Algebra, II, § 5, Exercise 1 1 for an example of a finitely generated pro-
jective module over an integral domain, which is not free.)*

2. Show that every projective A-module is the direct sum of a family of
projective submodules each of which admits a countable number of generators
("Kaplansky's Theorem"', apply Exercise 15 of § 1, to the case where E is a free
module).

3. Let c be a cardinal and P a projective A-module such that y(P) &lt; c (§ 1,
386



EXERCISES

Exercise 6). Show that if L is a free A-module with an infinite basis of
cardinal ^c, P © L is isomorphic to L. (Observe that there exists a free A-
module M, whose basis has cardinal ^ c, isomorphic to the direct sum of P and
an A-module Q,. Note that M (N) and P © M (N) are isomorphic.)

% 4. (a) Let E, E' be two A-modules, N a submodule of E and N' a sub-
module of E' such that E is projective and E/N and E'/N' are isomorphic. Show
that there exists an exact sequence

— &gt; N -^ E©N' AE' — &gt; 0.

(Observe that there exists a homomorphism/: E -&gt;- E' such that/(N) &lt;= N',
which gives when passing to the quotients an isomorphism E/N -&gt; E'/N';
define u and v in an analogous way to that used for the exact sequence (29) of
§ 1, no. 7.)

(b) Deduce from (a) that if E' is projective, E © N' and E' © N are iso-
morphic.

(c) Let 0-&gt;E m -s-E m _ 1 -&gt;. . .-&gt;Ei -&gt;E -&gt;0 be an exact sequence
of A-modules such that E , E l5 . . ., E m _ 2 are projective. Show that the A-

modules © E TO _ 2A and © E m _ 2ft+1 are isomorphic (with the convention that

E i = {0}forf &lt; 0).

5. Let u be a linear mapping from an A-module E to an A-module F and
v = l u its transpose. For every submodule N' of F*, the submodule of E ortho-
gonal to z;(N') is u (N), where N is the submodule of F orthogonal to N'.

6. (a) IfEisan A-module, every mjective endomorphism « of E is not a left
divisor of zero in the ring End A (E). Conversely, if for every sub-A-module
F 96 {0} of E there exists an endomorphism v # of E such that v(E) c: F, an
element which is not a left divisor of zero in End A (E) is an injective endo-
morphism. The above condition is satisfied if there exists a linear form x'eE*
and anxeE such that &lt;#, #'&gt; is invertible in A and in particular if E is free.

(b) Every endomorphism ^0 of the Z-module Qis bijective, although there
exists no linear form #0 on Q,.

(c) Let Up be the Z-module defined in § 1, Exercise 12(d). Show that the
endomorphism x \-+px of U p is not injective and is not a left divisor of zero in
End z (U p ).

7. (a) If u is a surjective endomorphism of an A-module E, u is not a right
divisor of zero in End A (E). Conversely, if for every submodule F ^ E of E
there exists a linear form x* e E* which is zero on F and surjective, every ele-
ment of End A (E) which is not a right divisor of zero is a surjective endo-
morphism.

(b) If E is the Z-module defined in Exercise 6(c), show that every endo-
morphism 7^0 of E is surjective, although there exists no linear form ^OonE.

387



-1



!I LINEAR ALGEBRA

(c) Show that if E is a free Z-module ^0, there exist non-surjective endo-
morphisms of E which are not right divisors of in End z (E).

8. (a) Let E be a free A-module, F, G two A-modules and u:E-+G,
v: F -&gt; G two linear mappings. Show that if w(E) cz V (F), there exists a linear
mapping w: E -&gt; F such that u = vow.

(b) Give an example of two non-zero endomorphisms u, v of the Z-module E
defined in Exercise 6(c) such that there exists no endomorphism w of E for
which u = vow (although «(E) = o(E) = E).

(c) Give an example of two endomorphisms u, v of the Z-module Z such that

u (0) = v (0) = {0}, but such that there exists no endomorphism w of Z for
which u = w o v (cf. § 7, Exercise 14).

9. Given an A-module E, for every submodule M of E (resp. every sub-
module M' of E*), let M° (resp. M'°) denote the orthogonal of M in E* (resp.
the orthogonal of M' in E). Consider the following four properties:

(A) The canonical homomorphism c E : E -&gt; E** is bijective.

(B) For every submodule M of E, the canonical homomorphism
E*/M° -&gt; M* is bijective.

(C) For every submodule M of E, M 00 = M.

(D) For every ordered pair of submodules M, N of E,

(M n N)° = M° + N°.

(a) Show that condition (B) implies (D) (prove that for x* e (M n N)°,
there exists y* e E* such that &lt;* + y, y*} = &lt;x, **&gt; for x e M and yeN).

(b) Let A be a ring with no divisors of zero, but having no field of left
fractions *(for example the tensor algebra of a vector space of dimension &gt; 1,
cf. Ill, § 5, Exercise 5)*. If we take E = A s , condition (A) is satisfied, but none
of conditions (B), (G), (D) (for an example where (B), (C), (D) hold, but not
(A), see § 7, no. 5, Theorem 6).

(c) Take A to be a product ring K 1 , where K is a commutative field and I
an infinite set. Show that the A-module E = A satisfies conditions (A) and
(B), but not (C) (observe that the annihilators of the ideals of A are all of the
form K J , where J c I).

(d) Suppose that for two submodules M, N of E such that NcM and
N ^ M, the dual (M/N)* is non-zero; then show that condition (B) implies
(G).

(e) The kernel of c K is the orthogonal (E*)° of E* in E. Give an example
where neither E* nor (E*)° is (consider a module containing an element
whose annihilator contains an element which is not a divisor of 0).

{/) Let M be a direct factor of E; show that M°° = M + (E*)°.

10. Give an example of an A-linear mapping u: E -&gt; F such that l u is bi-
jective but u is neither injective nor surjective (cf. Exercise 6(b) and (c)).

388



EXERCISES

Deduce an example where y Q e F is orthogonal to the kernel of l u but where the
equation u(x) = y Q has no solution.

111. Let A be a ring and I an A-module. I is called injective if, for every
exact sequence E' -&gt; E -»• E" of A-linear mappings, the sequence

Hom(E", I) -&gt; Hom(E, I) -&gt; Hom(E', I)
is exact.

(a) Show that the following properties are equivalent:

(a) I is injective.

(P) For every exact sequence 0-»E / -&gt;E-»E"-»0 of A-linear mappings,
the sequence

-&gt; Hom(E", I) -&gt; Hom(E, I) -» Hom(E', I) -»

is exact.

(y) For every A-module M and every submodule N of M, every A-linear
mapping of N into I can be extended to an A-linear mapping of M into I.

(8) For every left ideal a of A and every A-linear mapping/: a -&gt; I, there
exists an element b el such that/(a) = ab for all a e o.

(£) I is a direct factor of every A-module containing it.

(8) For every A-module E which is the sum of I and a monogenous sub-
module, I is a direct factor of E.

(To prove that (8) implies (y), show that property (8) implies that if E is an
A-module and F a submodule of E such that E/F is monogenous, then every
linear mapping of F into I can be extended to a linear mapping of E into I.
Then use Zorn's Lemma. To prove that (0) implies (8), consider the A-module
A, x 1 = M, the submodule NofM consisting of the elements (a, —f{a)) for
a e a, and apply (0) to the quotient module M/N.)

(b) For a Z-module E to be injective, it is necessary and sufficient that for
all x e E and every integer n ^ 0, there exists y e E such that ny = x. In
particular, the Z-modules Q, and Q,/Z are injective.

12. (a) For a product 1 1 E x of A-modules to be injective (Exercise 1 1), it is

necessary and sufficient that each of the E^ be injective.

(b) Let K be a commutative field, L an infinite set and A the product ring
K L . Show that A is an injective A-module (use (a)) but that the ideal o of A the
direct sum of the factors of K L (canonically identified with ideals of A) is not
an injective A-module.

If 13. (a) Let A be a ring and I an injective A-module (Exercise 11) such
that for every non-zero monogenous A-module E, there exists a non-zero
A-homomorphism of E into I. Let M be an A-module, N a submodule of M
and 53" the set of u e Hom A (M, I) such that u(x) = in N. Show that for all
y $ N, there exists a«eN such that u(y) # 0.

389



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

(b) Let A be a ring. For every (A, A)-bimodule T and every left (resp.
right) A-module M, Hom A (M, T) has canonically a right (resp. left) A-
module structure deriving from that on T, and there is a canonical A-homo-
morphism c MT : M-&gt;Hom A (Hom A (M, T), T) such that c MfT (x) is the
A-homomorphism tn-*u(x). Show that if I is an (A, A)-bimodule which, as
a left A-module, satisfies the conditions of (a), then the canonical homo-
morphism c MI is injective for every left A-module M.

(c) Suppose that I is an (A, A)-bimodule which is injective as a left A-
module and a right A-module and that for every (left or right) monogenous
A-module E ^ 0, there exists a non-zero A-homomorphism of E into I. Show
that under these conditions, if P is a left (resp. right) projective A-module,
Hom A (P, I) is a right (resp. left) injective A-module. (Suppose that P is a left
projective A-module. Observe that for every submodule N' of a right A-module
N, Hom A (N', I) is isomorphic to a quotient module of Hom A (N, I) and apply
(b) to the right module N and the left module P.)

(d) Let G be a commutative ring, A a C-algebra and I an injective C-module
such that for every monogenous G-module E ^ {0} there exists a non-zero
C-homomorphism of E into I. For every A-module M, Hom (M, I) is an
A-module; show that for every projective A-module P, Hom c (P, I) is an in-
jective A-module (same argument as in (c)).

14. Let A be a ring. Show that for every A-module M there exists an in-
jective A-module I such that M is isomorphic to a submodule of I. (Apply
Exercise 13(d) with G = Z, using Exercise 11(b) and the fact that every A-
module is the quotient of a free A-module.)

Tf 15. An A-module homomorphism u: E -&gt; F is called essential if it is in-
jective and if, for every submodule P ^ {0} of F, u (P) ^ {0}; it suffices that
this condition holds for every momogenous submodule P # {0} of F. If E is a
submodule of F, F is called an essential extension of E if the canonical injection
E -&gt; F is essential.

(a) Let m:E-&gt;F, z;: F -&gt; G be two A-homomorphisms of A-modules. If u
and v are essential, so is v o u. Conversely, if v o u is essential and v is injective,
then u and v are essential.

(b) Let E be a submodule of an A-module F and let (F x ) XeL be a family of
submodules of F containing E and whose union is F. Show that if each of the
F x is an essential extension of E, so is F.

(c) Let (mx)xsl be a family of essential homomorphisms u K : E K -&gt; F^,. Show
that the homomorphism ©^©E^©^ is essential. (Prove it first

when L has two elements, then use (b).)

(d) The Z-module Q,is an essential extension of Z but the product Qf is not
an essential extension of Z N .

(e) Let E be a submodule of a module F. Show that there exists a submodule

390



EXERCISES



Qof F such that QfiE = {0} and that the restriction to E of the canonical
homomorphism F -&gt; F/Q,is essential.

16. A submodule E of an A-module F is called irreducible with respect to F (or
in F) if E ^ F and E is not the intersection of two submodules of F distinct from
E.

(a) For an A-module F to be an essential extension of each of its submodules
^={0} it is necessary and sufficient that {0} be irreducible with respect to F.

(b) Let (EJ^l be a family of submodules of an A-module F. (E x ) XeL is
called a reduced irreducible decomposition of {0} in F if each of the F*. is irreducible
in F, if the intersection of the E x reduces to and if none of the E„ contains the
intersection of the E w for [x =£ X. When this is so, show that the canonical homo-
morphism of F into (F/E x ) is essential (if E* = P| E u , observe that the

image F^ of E' K in F/E„ is non-zero and that the image of F in ^0 (F/E„) contains

F£; then apply Exercise 15(c)). Conversely, if (E x )x eL is a family of sub-

modules of F irreducible in F and the canonical homomorphism F -&gt; (F/E x )

is essential, the family (E x ) is a reduced irreducible decomposition of {0} in F.

*[[ 17. (a) Let M, N, M', N' be four submodules of a module E such that

MnN = M'nN' = P. Show that

M = (M + (N n M')) n(M + (Nn N')).

Deduce that if M is irreducible in E, then necessarily P = M'nN or
P = N' n N.

(b) Let (N^j &lt;i&lt;n be a finite family of submodules of E irreducible in E and
M its intersection. Show that if (P,)i^&lt; m is a finite family of submodules of E
such that M = C\ P„ then for every index i such that 1 ^ i ^ n there exists an
index &lt;j&gt;(t) such that 1 ^ &lt;j&gt;(*) ^ m and such that, if we write Nf = jQ N fc ,
then M = P wi) n N,' (use (a)). Deduce that if none of the P y contains the
intersection of the P fc of index =£;, then m ^ n (successively replace the N, by
suitable P y , using the above result). Conclude that two reduced irreducible
decompositions of M in E, one of which is finite, necessarily have the same
number of terms (cf. Exercise 23).

1 18. (a) For an A-module I to be injective, show that it is necessary and
sufficient that I admit no essential extension distinct from itself (show that this
condition implies condition (8) of Exercise 11(a), arguing as for the proof that
(0) implies (8) in that exercise).

(b) Let I be an injective A-module. For a submodule E of I to be injective,
it is necessary and sufficient that E admit no essential extension distinct from

391



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

itself and contained in I (using Exercise 15(*)), show that this condition implies
that E is a direct factor of I).

(c) Let I be an injective A-module, E a submodule of I and h: E -&gt; F an
essential homomorphism. Show that there exists an injective homomorphism
j: F — &gt; I such that j o h is the canonical injection of E into I.

(d) Let I be an A-module and E a submodule of I. Show that the following
properties are equivalent:

(a) I is injective and is an essential extension of E.

(P) I is injective and for every injective homomorphism j of E into an
injective A-module J, there exists an injective homomorphism of I into J
extending j.

(y) I is injective and is the smallest injective submodule of I containing E.

(8) I is an essential extension of E and for every essential homomorphism
h: E -&gt; F, there exists an injective homomorphism j: F -&gt; I such that j oh
is the canonical injection of E into I.

(Use (c) and (a).) When these equivalent conditions hold, I is called an
injective envelope of E; I is then also an injective envelope of every submodule of I
containing E.

(e) Let I be an injective A-module and E a submodule of I. Show that every
maximal element of the set of essential extensions of E contained in I is an
injective envelope of E (use (b)). In particular, every A-module admits an in-
jective envelope (cf. Exercise 14).

(/) If I, I' are two injective envelopes of the same A-module E, show
that there exists an isomorphism of I onto I' leaving invariant the elements
ofE.

T[ 19. (a) Let E, F be two A-modules and M an injective submodule of
E © F. Let I be an injective envelope of M n E in M and J a supplementary
submodule of I in M. Show that the restriction to I (resp. J) of the canonical
projection of E F onto E (resp. F) is injective (compose with the projection
of I into E an extension E -&gt; I of the injection M n E -&gt; I).

(b) Let E be an A-module and M a submodule of E, maximal in the set of
injective submodules of E; M admits in E a supplementary submodule N
which contains no injective submodule #{0}. Show that for every injective
submodule P of E, the image of P under the projection of E onto M (under the
decomposition of E as a direct sum M N) is an injective envelope ofPnM
in M (use (a)). If M' is another submodule of E which is maximal in the set of
injective submodules of E, show that there exists an automorphism of E trans-
forming M into M' and leaving invariant the elements of N.

^[ 20. (a) Let A be a ring admitting a field of left fractions K (I, § 9, Exercise
15). Show that K, considered as a left A-module, is an injective envelope of
A s . (Apply criterion (a) of Exercise 18(d) and criterion (8) of Exercise 11(a)
noting that iff: a -&gt; K is an A-linear mapping of a left ideal a of A into K, the

392



EXERCISES

element x~ 1 f(x) for x e a, x # (the inverse being taken in K) does not depend
on x e a.)

(b) Let Up be the sub-Z-module of Q,/Z consisting of the canonical images
of the rational numbers of the form kjp n , where p is a given prime number,
keZ and n e N (II, § 1, Exercise 12 (&lt;/)). Show that U p is an injective envelope
of each of the Z-modules/&gt;~ n Z/Z isomorphic to Z/p n Z. Show that there exist
automorphisms of U p distinct from the identity automorphism leaving in-
variant the elements of a submodule /&gt;~ n Z/Z.

T[ 21. (a) Let (E y ) y6 j be a finite family of A-modules and for all,/ e J let L,
be an injective envelope of E y ; show that © L, is an injective envelope of

© E,.

(b) An A-module M is called indecomposable if it is distinct from {0} and it
is not the direct sum of two submodules distinct from {0}. Show that if I is
an injective A-module, the following properties are equivalent:

(a) {0} is an irreducible submodule in I.

(P) I is indecomposable.

(y) I is an injective envelope of each of its submodules ^0. (Use (a) and
Exercise 18 (e).)

(8) I is isomorphic to the injective envelope I (A/q), where q is an irreducible
left ideal of A.

Moreover, when this is so, for all x # in I, Ann(#) is an irreducible left
ideal of A and I is isomorphic to I(A/Ann(#)).

Deduce that for the injective envelope of an A-module E to be indecom-
posable, it is necessary and sufficient that {0} be an irreducible submodule of
E.

(c) Give an example of an indecomposable Z-module E such that its injec-
tive envelope 1(E) is decomposable (cf. VII, § 3, Exercise 5).

(d) Let E be an A-module, I an injective envelope of E and I = © 1^,

a decomposition of I as a direct sum of a finite family of indecomposable

injective submodules; for all X e L let J*, = © 1^ and let N K = J x n E. Show

that (Na,)a, 6L is a reduced irreducible decomposition of {0} in E (Exercise
16 (b)) and that I x is an injective envelope of E/N*,. Conversely, every reduced
irreducible decomposition of {0} in E can be obtained by the above procedure
uniquely up to isomorphism (use Exercise 16 (b)).

22. Let I be an injective A-module. If I is indecomposable, every injective
endomorphism of I is an automorphism of I. Deduce that, for I to be indecom-
posable, it is necessary and sufficient that the non-invertible elements of the
ring End(I) form a two-sided ideal of that ring.

393



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

f 23. Let M be an A-module, the direct sum of a family (finite or other-
wise) (MJxgL of submodules such that for all XeL the non-invertible ele-
ments of End(M x ) form a two-sided ideal of this ring (which implies that M x
is indecomposable).

(a) Let/, g be two endomorphisms of M such that/ + g = 1 M - Show that
for every finite sequence (X fc ) 1&lt;fc&lt;s of distinct indices in L there exists a family
of submodules N fc (1 &lt; k &lt; s) of M such that for every k one of the endo-
morphisms/, g restricted to M Xfc is an isomorphism of this submodule onto N fc
and that M is the direct sum of the N fc (1 ^ k ^ s) and the M x for X distinct
from X fc . (Reduce it to the case s = 1 ; if tz k is the canonical projection of M

onto M^, corresponding to the decomposition as a direct sum of M^ and © M u ,

|i T* X

note that either 7r x °/or n K ° g, restricted to M x , is an automorphism of M^.)

(b) Let /be an idempotent endomorphism of M. Show that there exists at
least one index XeL such that the restriction of/ to M. K is an isomorphism
of M x onto/(M x ); moreover /(M x ) is a direct factor of M. (If g = 1 M — /,
note that there exists a finite sequence of indices (X fc ) 1&lt;fc&lt;s such that the inter-
section of Ker(g) and the direct sum of the M Xfc is ^{0} and use (a).)

(c) Deduce from (6) that every indecomposable direct factor of M is iso-
morphic to one of the M*,.

(d) Let (N K ) KeK be a family of indecomposable submodules of M of which
M is the direct sum; every N K is therefore isomorphic to an M K and vice
versa, by virtue of (c) . Let T be the set of classes of indecomposable submodules
of M (under the relation of isomorphism) such that an M*, (or an N K ) be-
longs to one of these classes. For all feT, let R(£) (resp. S(t)) be the set of
XeL (resp. k e K) such that M*, e t (resp. N K e t). Show that, for all t e T,
Card(R(/)) = Card(S(*)). (In the notation of (a), let J(k) be the set XeL
such that the restriction of iz K to N K is an isomorphism of N K onto M x ; show
that J(k) is finite and that the J(k) cover K(t) when k runs through S(t).
Deduce that Card(S(*)) ^ Card(R(f)) when R(t) is infinite. When R(t) is
finite, show with the aid of (a) that M is the direct sum of the M k for X ^ K(t)
and a subfamily of (N K ) K6S(t) of cardinal equal to that of R(O-)

(e) Deduce from (d) and Exercises 22 and 21 (d) that if (E x&gt; ) XeL , and
(Ek) k &lt;=k are two reduced irreducible decompositions of {0} in a module F,
L and K are equipotent.

24. Let M be an A-module, I its injective envelope (Exercise 18), o a
two-sided ideal of A and Q, the submodule of I consisting of the z e I such
that az = {0}; Qhas a natural (A/ o) -module structure. Let N be the sub-
module of M consisting of the x e M such that ax = {0}; if N is considered
as an (A/ a) -module, show that Q, is isomorphic to an injective envelope
ofN.

25. (a) For an A-module Q, to be injective, it is sufficient that, for every
394



EXERCISES

projective A-module P and every submodule P' of P, every linear mapping of
P' into Q, can be extended to a linear mapping of P into Q, (use the fact that
every A-module is a quotient of a projective A-module).

(b) For an A-module P to be projective, it is sufficient that, for every
injective A-module Q,and every quotient module Q," of Q,,every homomorphism
of P into Q," be of the form (j&gt; o u, where &lt;J&gt; : Q,-&gt; Q," is the canonical homomor-
phism and u is a homomorphism of P into Q, (use the fact that every A-
module is a submodule of an injective A-module).

26. For every Z-module G and every integer n &gt; 0, let n G denote the ker-
nel of the endomorphism x *-&gt; nx of G. If -&gt; G' -^ G -&gt; G" -&gt; is an exact
sequence, define a canonical homomorphism d : n G" -&gt; G' /nG' such that the
sequence

— &gt; n G' — &gt; n G" -^&gt; G'/rcG' — &gt; G/nG — &gt; G'/wG" — &gt;
is exact. If n G and G/nG are finite, we write

A n (G) = Card(G/nG) - Card( n G);
then show that n G', n G", G'/nG', G'/nG" are finite and that
h n (G) = h n (G') + A n (G").

§3

1. Let A be a ring, E a right A-module and F a left A-module. Let/ be a
function defined on the set S of all finite sequences

((*i, Vi), (*2, y 2 ), •-, (*n, Vn)) (" arbitrary)
of elements of E x F with values in a set G and such that:

(1) /((*1&gt; yi)&gt; • • • &gt; (*n, #n)) = /((*a&lt;l), y a a))&gt; • • • &gt; (^n), ^(n)))

for every permutation &lt;r e 6 n ;

(2) /((*i + x' x ,y x ), (x 2&gt; y 2 ), . . ., (x n ,y n ))

= /{{xi,yi), (x'uyi), (x 2 ,y 2 ), ..., (x n ,y n ));

(3) /((*i, yi + y'i), (x 2 , y 2 ), . . . , (x n , y n ))

f{{xi,yi), {xi,y'i), (x 2 ,y 2 ), . . ., (* n ,y n ));

(4) /( (* X X, y x ) , . . . , (* n , y n ) ) = /( fo, XyO , . . . , (x n , y n ) )

for all X e A.

Show that there exists one and only one mapping g of E ® A F into G

such that/( (*!,#!)&gt; ■■■&gt; (x n ,y n )) = gyfa x t ®y t ). (Note that if

i *i &lt;8&gt; yt = X x'j (g) y' t ,

395



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

the difference Z* (x i} y t ) — 2* (#/, y'j) in the Z-module Z (E * P) is a linear
combination with integer coefficients of elements of the form (2) of no. 1.)

*2. Consider the field C of complex numbers as a vector space over the
field R of real numbers.

(a) Show that the canonical mapping C (gin, C -&gt; C ® c C is not infective.

(b) Show that the two C-module structures on C ® R C arising from each
of the factors are distinct*.

3. (a) Let (E x ) XeL be a family of right A-modules and F a left A-module.
Show that if F is finitely generated, the canonical mapping

(nE^F^njE^F)

is surjective.

(b) Give an example of a commutative ring A and an ideal m of A such
that the canonical mapping A N ® A (A/m) -» (A/m) N is not injective (cf. § 1 ,
Exercise 2 (£)).

(c) Give an example of a commutative ring A such that the canonical
mapping A N ® A A N -&gt;A N * N is not surjective (observe that for given n, the

r

image of N under a mapping of the form wh- Z, u i {m)v i {n) i where the w 4

and v t belong to A N , generate a finitely generated ideal of A).

(d) Deduce from (b) and (c) an example where the canonical homomorph-
ism (22) (no. 7) is neither injective nor surjective.

4. Let E be a right A-module and F a free left A-module. Show that if x
is a free element of E and y an element ^0 of F, then x ® y # 0; if also A is
commutative and y is a free element of F, then x ® y is free in the A-module
E ® A F.



§4

1. Let A, B be two rings, E a left A-module, F a right A-module and G an
(A, B)-bimodule; Hom B (F, G) then has a left A-module structure and
Hom A (E, G) a right B-module structure. Show that the Z-modules

Hom A (E, Hom B (F, G)) and Hom B (F, Hom A (E, G))

are both canonically isomorphic to the Z-module of Z-bilinear mappings /
of E x F into G such that f{cnx,y) = ctf(x,y) and f(x,y$) =f{x,y)$ for
a e A, (3 e B, x e E, y e F.

2. Let A be the ring Z/4Z, m the ideal 2Z/4Z of A and E the A-module
396



EXERCISES

A/m. Show that the canonical mapping E* &lt;g) A E -&gt; Hom A (E, E) is neither
injective nor surjective. The same is true of the canonical mapping

E &lt;g&gt; A E-&gt;Hom A (E*,E)
and the canonical mapping E* &lt;g) A E* -&gt; (E &lt;g) A E)*.

3. Show that under the conditions of no. 2, if E is assumed to be a finitely
generated left A-module and F a projective right B-module, the canonical
homomorphism (7) (no. 2) is bijective.

4. Given an example where the canonical homomorphism (21) (no. 4) is
neither injective nor surjective, although F 2 = C, E x = C and E 2 and ¥ ± are
finitely generated G-modules (cf. Exercise 2).

5. Let A, B be two rings, E a right A-module, F a left A-module and G a
(B, A)-bimodule.

(a) Show that there exists one and only one Z-linear mapping

7] : E &lt;g) A F -&gt; Hom B (Hom A (E, G), G &lt;g) A F)

which maps the tensor product x ® y, where x e E and y e F, to the mapping
v Xt y :u \-&gt; u(x) (g&gt; y of Hom A (E, G) into G ® A F. When B = A and G = sA d ,
the homomorphism reduces to the canonical homomorphism (15) (no. 2).

(b) Show that if F is a projective A-module and E and G are such that for
x ^ in E there exists u e Hom A (E, G) such that u(x) # 0, then the homo-
morphism &gt;) is injective.

^[ 6. Let A, B be two rings, E a left A-module, F an (A, B)-bimodule and
G a right B-module.

(a) Show that there exists one and only one Z-linear mapping

cx:Hom B (F, G) &lt;g) A E -&gt; Hom B (Hom A (E, F), G)

such that for x e E and u e Hom B (F, G), a(u &lt;g&gt; x) is the mapping z&gt; i-&gt; u(v(x))
ofHom A (E, F) intoG.

(b) If E is a finitely generated projective A-module, show that cr is bijec-
tive.

(c) Suppose that G is an injective B-module (§ 2, Exercise 11) and that E
is the cokernel of an A-linear mapping A™ — &gt;■ A". Show that a is bijective (start
from the exact sequence A"-&gt;As -&gt;E-&gt;0 and use (b), the definition of
injective modules and Theorem 1 of § 2, no. 1 , and Proposition 5 of § 3,
no. 6).

7. Show that, if E l5 E 2 , F l5 F 2 are four modules over a commutative ring

397



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

C, the canonical homomorphism (21) (no. 4) is composed of the homomor-
phisms

Hom(E l5 FO ® Hom(E 2 , F 2 ) -» Hom(E 1 , F 2 Hom(E 2 , F 2 ))

-&gt; Hom(E 1 , Hom(E 2 , F x &lt;g) F 2 ))
-&gt; Hom(E 1 ® E 2 , F x ® F 2 )

where the first two homomorphisms come from the canonical homomorphism
(7) (no. 2) and the last is the isomorphism of no. 1, Proposition 1.

8. Let E, F be two finitely generated projective modules over a commuta-
tive ring C. Show that if u is an endomorphism of E and v an endomorphism
of F then Tr(u ® v) = Tr(u)Tr(v).

9. Let A be a ring, G its centre, E a right A-module, F a left A-module
and E*, F* the respective duals of E and F. An additive mapping /of
E* ® c F* into A is called doubly linear iff(aw) — af{w) and f(wa) =f(w)a
for all w e E* (g) F* and all a e A. Show that there exists one and only one
C-linear mapping $ of E ® A F into the C-module L of doubly linear map-
pings of E* (g) c F* into A such that

(&lt;K* ®y))(x* £&gt;#*) = &lt;x*,x}(y,y*y
for all x e E, y e F, x* e E*, y* e F*. If E and F are finitely generated projec-
tive modules, § is bijective.



§5

1 . Give an example of a homomorphism p : A -&gt; B of commutative rings and
two A-modules E, F such that the canonical homomorphism (17) (no. 3) is
neither injective nor surjective (cf. § 4, Exercise 2).

2. Give an example of a free A-module and a ring B such that the homo-
morphism (20) (no. 4) is not injective (§ 3, Exercise 3).

3. Give an example of a monogenous A-module E and a ring B such that
the homomorphism (20) (no. 4) is not surjective (cf. § 4, Exercise 2).

4. Let p:A-&gt;B be a ring homomorphism. For every A-module E, show
that the diagram



E



£**



(E**)



(B)



E,



(B)



E( B )



* (E ( B))** -ZT+ ((E*W*



is commutative.
398



EXERCISES

5. Let K be a field, A the product ring K N , a the ideal K OT of A and B
the ring A/ a. Show that o is a projective A-module which is not finitely
generated, although a (B) = {0}.

6. With the rings A and B defined as in § 1, Exercise 7, let M be an A-
module; show that for M to be finitely generated (resp. free, projective), it is
necessary and sufficient that M (g) A B be finitely generated (resp. free, pro-
jective).

7. Let p:A-&gt;B be a ring homomorphism. For every left B-module F,
define a canonical B-module homomorphism

F-p( P ,(F))

and show that if E is a left A-module, the composite mappings

p(E)-&gt;p( P+ (p(E)))-&gt;p(E)

P*(F)^P*(P(P*(F)))-&gt;P*(F)
are the identity mappings.

§6

1. Let (E n ,/ nm ) be the inverse system of Z-modules whose indexing set is
N, such that E n = Z for all n and, for n ^ m,f nm is the mapping x k&gt; 3 m ~ n x.
For all n, let « n be the canonical mapping E n -&gt; Z/2Z. Show that (u n ) is an
inverse system of surjective linear mappings but that lim u n is not surjective.

2. Let (E a ,/ Bot ) be a direct system of A-modules. Show that the A-module

lim E a is canonically isomorphic to the quotient of the direct sum © E a = F

by the submodule N generated by the elements of the formj D (/ B(x (.*: a )) — j a (# a ),
for every ordered pair (a, (3) such that a ^ (3 and all # a e E a , the ./ a :E a -&gt; F
being the canonical injections.

3. Let (F n ,f mn ) be the direct system of Z-modules such that F„ is equal
to Up (§1, Exercise 12 (d)) for all n ^ and / mn is the endomorphism
x\-+p m - n x of Up for n ^ m. Show that limF n = {0} although the/ mn are
surjective. &gt;

Tf 4. Let (F a ,/ Ba ) be a direct system of A-modules.

(a) For every A-module E, define a canonical Z-module homomorphism

s:lim Hom A (E, F a ) -&gt; Hom A (E, lim F a ).

(b) Show that if E is finitely generated, s is injective. Give an example
where s is not injective (cf. Exercise 3, taking E = lim F a ).

399



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

(c) Show that if E is finitely generated and the/,j a are infective, s is surjec-
tive. Give an example where E = lim F a is free, the / Pa are injective and s

is not surjective.

(d) Show that if E is projective and finitely generated, s is bijective.

*(e) Let A be an integral domain and a an ideal of A which is not finitely
generated. If ( o a ) is the family of finitely generated ideals contained in o,
show that E = A/ o is canonically isomorphic to the direct limit of the
F a = A/ a a , but that the homomorphism s is not surjective. *

§7

1. Show that if E is a vector space #{0} over a field K with an infinity of
elements, the set of generating systems of E is not inductive for the order
relation =&gt; (form a decreasing sequence (S n ) of generating systems of E such
that the intersection of the S n is empty).

^[ 2. Let K be a field, L a subfield of K, I a set and (^ { )i &lt;i&lt;m a free family
of vectors in Kg such that the coordinates of each of the #, belong to L. Let V
be the vector subspace of K] generated by the # 4 ; show that there exists a
finite subset J of I, with m elements, such that for every vector z = (Cx) aeI of V,
all the £ a belong to the subfield of K generated by L and the m elements £ B
where (3 £ J. (By applying Corollary 3 of no. 5, to the space L*, show that it can
be reduced to the case where there exist m indices p t e I (1 ^ i ^ m) such that

P'Btfo) = 8 i/)-

^[ 3. (a) Let G be a group and M an infinite subset of G. Show that if G' is
the subgroup of G generated by M, then Card(G') = Card(M).

(b) Let K be a field and M an infinite subset of K. Show that if K' is the
subfield of K generated by M, then Card(K') = Card(M). (Consider two
sequences (A n ) n&gt;0} (P B )n&gt;o of subsets of K such that A = M, P n is the
multiplicative subgroup of K* generated by A n n K* and A n + 1 the additive
subgroup of K generated by P n ; then apply (a).)

(c) Let K be a field and I an infinite set; show that Card(K) ^ dim(Ks).
(Reduce it to the case I = N and argue by reductio ad absurdum. Let B be a basis
of K? such that Card(B) &lt; Card(K) and let L be the subfield of K generated
by the coordinates of all the elements of B; then Card(L) &lt; Card(K). Form
a sequence (£ n )„&gt;i of elements of K such that for all n, £ n does not belong to
the subfield of K generated by L and the ^ of index i &lt; n; then apply Exer-
cise 2 to obtain a contradiction, by considering the point x = (£ n ) of K^.)

(d) Deduce from (c) that for every field K and every infinite set I,

dim(K^) = (CardCK)) "*®
("Erdos-Kaplansky theorem").

400



EXERCISES

4. Give an example of an infinite sequence (F n ) of vector subspaces of a
vector space E such that codim(n F n ) &gt; 2, codim(F n ). (Take codim(F n ) = 1
for all n and use Exercise 3 (d).)

5. Let (HjJ XeIj be a family of hyperplanes (passing through 0) of a vector
space E over a field K, which is a covering of E.

(a) Show that, if K is finite, then Gard(L) ^ 1 + Card(K) and, if K is
infinite, Card(L) ^ K = Gard(N). (Prove by induction on r that if K has
at least r elements, then E cannot be the union of r hyperplanes.) Show by
examples that these inequalities cannot be improved without an additional
hypothesis (when K is infinite, consider the space E = K s ).

(b) If E is finite-dimensional, show that Gard(L) ^ 1 + Card(K). (Argue
by induction on dim(E).)

Tf 6. Let S be a non-empty finite subset of a vector K-space E, not contain-
ing 0. Suppose that there exists an integer k ^ 1 with the following property:

(*) for all x e S, there is a partition of S — {#} into h free subsets with
h ^ k.

For such a partition (N ( ) 1&lt;i&lt;h and every sequence (r f ) 1&lt;j&lt;m of integers of
(1,A) a subspace F rira . t#rm of E is defined by induction on m as follows:
F ri is the subspace generated by N ri , F ri ... rp the subspace generated by the
intersection of F ri&gt; .. r x and N rp . Suppose that:

(**) for all #eS and every partition (N() 1&lt;i&lt;fc of S — {*} into at most
k free subsets, there exists at least one sequence (r y ) 1&lt;i&lt;m such that

(a) Let n be the least of the integers m ^ 1 for all possible choices of x e S
and let (N t ) 1&lt;1&lt;fc and (r y ) 1&lt;i&lt;m satisfy conditions (*) and (**). Show that of
necessity n = 1 . (Argue by reductio ad absurdum by assuming x $ F rira , . . rn and
n &gt; 1. Then necessarily xe¥ Tn . For simplicity write E p = F rit . 2 ... rp for

1 ^ p &lt; n and x = Z, a^ with oq e K and y t e N rn ; there is at least one y i

not belonging to E n _ x , denote it by y; then write N = N rn — {y}, N[ = N t
for 1 ^ i ^ h and * # r rt , N£ n =Nu {#}, so that (NJ) 1&lt;i&lt;A is a partition of
S — {y} consisting of free subsets. Define Eq = E and for 1 ^ p &lt; n, E' p as
the subspace generated by the intersection of Ep_ x and N£ p . Now y $ E n _ 1 ;
let q be the least integer such that y $ E,; show that E£ cfc E q . Let s be the
least integer such that E' s &lt;£ E s ; show that r s = r n ; deduce finally a contra-
diction from the relations y e E s , Es_ x c E s _ 1 and E' s &lt;£ E s .)

(b) Conclude from (a) that with the given hypotheses there exists a par-
tition of S into h free subsets for an integer h ^ k.

^[ 7. Let S be a non-empty finite subset of a vector K-space E, not contain-
ing 0. Suppose that there exists an integer k ^ 1 such that for every subset

401



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

T of S, Card(T) ^ &amp;.rg(T). Show that there exists a partition of S into h
free subsets for some integer h &lt; k. (Prove that S satisfies condition (**) of
Exercise 6, arguing by induction on Gard(S) and taking amongst all the
subspaces F ri ... rm one of those with the smallest possible dimension; if G is
such a subspace and j an index for which Card(G n N y ) is the least possible,
prove that

£.Card(G n N y ) &lt; Card(G n (S - {*}))

&lt; Card(G nS)&lt; £.Card(G n N,).)

8. Let E be a vector space. Show that every endomorphism of E which is
not a right divisor of in End(E) is surjective (§ 2, Exercise 7).

9. Let K be a field.

(a) In the vector space E = Ks Z) , let (e n ) neX denote the canonical basis;
let v be the automorphism of E defined by the relations v(e n ) = e n + 1 for all
n e Z. If u = 1 E — v, show that u is an injective endomorphism of E, but that
dim(Coker(w)) = 1.

(b) In the vector space E = Kg N) , let (e n ) nels denote the canonical basis;
let v be the endomorphism of E defined by v(e ) = e , v(e n ) = e n _ x + e n for
n ^ 1. Show that v is an automorphism of E and that, if u = 1 B — v, u is a
surjective endomorphism of E such that dim (Ker(«)) = 1.

(c) Let I be a non-empty set. Show that every automorphism u of the vector
space E = Kg J) can be written as a difference u = v — w of two automorph-
isms of E, except when K has only two elements and I consists of a single
element. (Note that it suffices to prove that one particular automorphism u
is of the desired form; when K is a field with two elements, consider separately
the cases where Card(I) = 2 and Card(I) = 3.)

^[ 10. Let E be a vector space over a field K. Show that every endomorphism
u of E is an automorphism or can be written as u = v — w, where v and w
are automorphisms of E. (Observe that u can always be replaced by^oao s 2 ,
where s x and s 2 are two automorphisms of E. Distinguish two cases, according
to whether dim (Ker(u)) &lt; dim(Coker(w)) or dim(Ker(«)) &gt; dim(Goker(«));
when rg(u) is finite, then the first case always holds. When

dim(Ker(«)) ^ dim(Coker(w)),

it can be reduced to the case where Ker(a) n Im(w) = {0}; if

dim(Ker(«)) = dim(Coker(w)),

it can also be assumed that Im(«) + Ker(tt) = E and then apply Exercise
9 (c). If dim(Ker(w)) &lt; dim(Coker(w)), there is a supplementary subspace
inEofKer(u)oftheformW © Im(a) with dim(W) = dim(Im(u)) = dim(E);
apply the remark at the beginning with ^(^(Im^))) = Im(«) and use Exer-
cise 9 (a) and (c). When dim(Ker(#)) &gt; dim(Goker(w)), it can be reduced to

402



EXERCISES

the case where Ker(M) &lt;=■ Im(«); this time take ^ 1 (Ker(«)) = u(K.er(u)) and
use the results of the preceding cases and Exercise 9.)

11. Let E, F be two vector spaces over a field K and «:E— &gt;F a linear
mapping. Show that for every vector subspace V of F,

dim~(i (V)) = dim(V n Im(«)) + dim(Ker(«)).

12. Let E, F be two vector spaces and u, v two linear mappings of E
into F.

(a) Show that the following inequalities hold :

rgfa) &lt; r g(" + ») + rg(n)
rg{u + o) &lt; inf(dim(E), dim(F), rg(«) + rg(»)).

If E and F are finite-dimensional, show that rg(u + v) can take any integer
value satisfying the inequalities

|rg(") - r g(v)\ &lt; rg(« + v) &lt; inf(dim(E), dim(F), rg(u) + rg(o)).

(b) Show that

dim(Ker(M + v)) &lt; dim(Ker(w) n Ker(»)) + dim(Im(w) n Im(o)).

(c) Show that

dim(Goker(« + »)) ^ dim(Coker(a)) + rg(z&gt;).
(If V is a supplementary subspace of Ker(o) in E, note that

ii(Ker(p)) &lt;= Im(a + v) and dim(«(V)) ^ rg(»).)

13. Let E, F, G be three vector spaces and u:E -&gt; F, v:F -&gt; G two linear
mappings.

(a) Show that there exists a decomposition of E as a direct sum of Ker(w)
and two subspaces M, N such that Ker(y o «) = M Ker(w) and

Im(oofi) = »(a(N)).

(b) dim(Ker(«)) &lt; dim(Ker(z&gt; o u)) ^ dim(Ker(«)) + dim(Ker(z&gt;)); if
Ker(w) and Ker(y) are finite-dimensional, show that dim(Ker(z&gt; o u)) can
take every integer value satisfying the above inequalities.

(c) The following equalities hold :

rg(tt) = rg(v o a) + dim(Im(«) n Ker(z&gt;))
rg(v) = rg(vo U ) + codim P (Im(w) + Ker(»)).
If F is finite-dimensional, show that rg(» o u) can take any integer value
satisfying the inequality

sup(0, rg(tt) + ig(p) - ») &lt; rg(o o a) &lt; inf(rg(«), rg(o)).

14. Let E, F, G be three vector spaces and m:E -&gt; F, w:E -&gt; G two linear

-l -i

mappings. Show that if n(0) c a&gt;(0), there exists a linear mapping v of F
into G such that w = o o u (cf. § 2, Exercise 8).

403



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

15. Let E, F be two vector spaces over a field K and m:E -&gt; F a linear
mapping.

(a) The following conditions are equivalent i (1) Ker(w) is finite-dimen-
sional ; (2) there exists a linear mapping v of F into E such that v o u — 1 E + w,
where w is an endomorphism of E of finite rank; (3) for every vector space G
over K and every linear mapping f:G -&gt; E, the relation rg(u of) &lt; + oo
implies rg(/) &lt; +oo.

(b) The following conditions are equivalent: (1) Coker(w) is finite-dimen-
sional; (2) there exists a linear mapping v of F into E such that u°v = 1 P + w ,
where w is an endomorphism of F of finite rank; (3) for every vector space
G over K and every linear mapping g:F -» G, the relation rg(g °u) &lt; +oo
implies rg(g) &lt; +oo.

16. Let E, F be two vector spaces over K and m:E -&gt; F a linear mapping.
u is said to be of finite index if Ker(a) and Coker(w) are finite-dimensional
and the number d(u) = dim(Ker(a)) — dim(Goker(u)) is then called the
index of u.

Let G be a third vector space over K and v:F -&gt; G a linear mapping. Show
that if two of the three linear mappings u,v,v°u are of finite index, so is the
third and d(v°u) = d(u) + d(v) (use Exercise 13 (a)).

17. Let E, F, G, H be four vector spaces over K and u:E -&gt; F, v:F -&gt; G,
w:G -&gt; H three linear mappings. Show that

rg(» ou) + rg(w o v) &lt; rg(v) + rg(w °vou).

18. Let E, F be two vector spaces over a field K and u, v two linear mappings
of E into F. For there to exist an automorphism/ of E and an automorphism
g of F such that v = g ° u of, it is necessary and sufficient that rg(u) = rg(o),
dim(Ker(w)) = dim(Ker(z&gt;)) and dim(Coker(«)) = dim(Coker(z&gt;)).

19. Let E be a vector space over a field K.

(a) Show that every mapping/ of E into E which is permutable with every
automorphism of E is of the form x*-+olx, where a e K (show first that for
all *eE there exists p(x) eK such that/(x) = p{x)x, using the fact that/
commutes with every automorphism of E leaving x invariant).

(b) Let g be a mapping of E x E into E such that, for every automorphism
u of E, g{u{x), u{y)) = u{g(x,y)) for all x, y in E. Show that there exist two
elements a, £ of K such that g(x, y) = a* + (ty on the set of ordered pairs
(x,y) of linearly independent elements of E; moreover there exists a mapping
&lt;J&gt;ofK x K into K such that g(hc, [ix) = (j&gt;(X, \i)xforall xeE (same method).
If further g(u(x),u(y)) = u(g(x,y)) for every endomorphism u of E, then
g( x , y) — &lt;** + $y f° r a U x &gt; V m E- Generalize to mappings of E n into E.

20. Let E be a vector space.

(a) Show that if M and N are two vector subspaces of E and M', N' the

404



EXERCISES

orthogonals of M and N respectively in E*, the orthogonal ofMnN is
M' + N' (cf. § 2, Exercise 9 (a)).

(b) If E is infinite-dimensional, show that there exist hyperplanes H' of
E* such that the subspace of E orthogonal to H' reduces to (consider a
hyperplane containing the coordinate forms corresponding to a basis of E).

(c) Show that if E is infinite-dimensional there exists an infinite family
(V t ) of subspaces of E such that, if VJ is the subspace of E* orthogonal to V M

the subspace of E* orthogonal to D V t is distinct from 2, V t '.

(a*) Deduce from (b) that if E is infinite-dimensional, there exists a decompo-
sition V © W of E* as a direct sum, W being finite-dimensional, for which
the sum V+Wof subspaces V, W of E orthogonal respectively to V and
W is distinct from E.

(e) For a subspace of E to be finite-dimensional, it is necessary and sufficient
that its orthogonal in E* be of finite codimension.

21 . With the notation of Theorem 8 of no. 6, let u denote the linear mapping
x i-&gt; «#, xfy) of E into Kj and y Q = (iQ t ). K® is identified with a subspace of
the dual of Kg under the canonical mapping of K® into its bidual; then show
that if N' is the kernel of '«, the condition of Theorem 3 (no. 5) expresses the
fact thaty is orthogonal to the intersection of N' and K ( &lt;P. When I is infinite
and the system (21) (no. 5) is of finite rank, show that this intersection is dis-
tinct from N' (note that N' is then of finite codimension).

22. Let E and F be two vector spaces over a field K and u a linear mapping
of E into F. If V is a vector subspace of E and V the orthogonal of V in E*,
show that the dual of u(V) is isomorphic to *m(F*)/(V n *w(F*)). If W' is
a subspace of F* such that 'm(W') is finite-dimensional and W is the orthogonal
of W' in F, 'a(W') is isomorphic to the dual of the space w(E)/(W n «(E)).

23. Show that for a linear mapping u of a vector space E into a vector space
F to be such that rg('w) = rg(tt), it is necessary and sufficient that rg(u) be
finite (cf. Exercise 3 (a*)).

24. Let E be a vector space of finite dimension n &gt; 1 over a commutative
field K; show that, unless n = 2 and K is a field with two elements, there
exists no isomorphism § of E onto E* depending only on the vector space
structure of E. (Note that if § is such an isomorphism, then necessarily
&lt;#, (|&gt;(y)&gt; = &lt;«(#), &lt;K"(y))&gt; f° r x,y inE and for every automorphism u of E
(Set Theory, IV, § 1, no. 5).)

25. (a) Let K be a field and L, M two sets; there are canonical inclusions
(K L)(M) c (K&lt; M) ) L c K£ xM . Show that for two of these vector spaces to be
equal, it is necessary and sufficient that one of the sets L, M be finite.

405



LINEAR ALGEBRA



(b) Let (E x ) XeL be a family of right vector spaces over K and (F ll ) tl6M a
family of left vector spaces over K. For the canonical mapping (26)
(no. 7) to be bijective, it is necessary and sufficient that one of the vector spaces

1 1 E x , i 1 F„ be finite-dimensional (use (a)).

26. {a) Let E, F be two left vector spaces over a field K; for the canonical
homomorphism E* (g) K F -&gt; Hom K (E, F) to be bijective, it is necessary and
sufficient that one of the spaces E, F be finite-dimensional.

(b) Let E be a right vector space and F a left vector space over a field K.
For the canonical homomorphism E ® K F -&gt;■ Hom K (E*, F) to be bijective,
it is necessary and sufficient that E be finite-dimensional (use Exercise 3 (d)).

27. (a) Under the hypotheses of Proposition 16 (i) (no. 7), for the canonical
homomorphism (27) (no. 7) to be bijective, it is necessary and sufficient that E
or F be finite-dimensional (note that the image under (27) (no. 7) of an element
of Hom K (E, G) ® L F maps E to a subspace of G ® L F contained in a subspace
of the form G ® L F', where F' is a finite-dimensional subspace of F).

(b) Under the hypotheses of Proposition 16 (ii) (no. 7), for the canonical
homomorphism (28) (no. 7) to be bijective, it is necessary and sufficient that
one of the ordered pairs (E l5 E 2 ), (E l5 F x ), (E 2 , F 2 ) consist of finite-dimensional
vector spaces (use (a) and Exercise 7 of § 4).

28. Let p:K-&gt;A be an injective homomorphism of a field K into a ring
A and let E be a left vector space over K. For the canonical mapping
(E*) (A) -*- (E (A) )* to be bijective, it is necessary and sufficient that E be
finite-dimensional or that A, considered as a right vector K-space, be finite-
dimensional (use Exercise 25 (b)). When one of these two cases holds, there
exists a canonical bijection (E**) (A) -&gt; (E (A) )**.

29. Let A be an integral domain, K its field of fractions, E an A-module
and T(E) its torsion module.

(a) Show that every linear form on E is zero on T(E), so that the duals
E* and (E/T(E))* are canonically isomorphic.

(b) Show that the canonical mapping (E*) (K) -» (E (K) )* is injective and
that it is bijective when E is finitely generated.

(c) Give an example of a torsion-free A-module E such that E* = {0} and
E ( K) # {0}.

^f 30. Let A be an integral domain and E, F two A-modules. Show that if
a; is a free element of E and y a free element of F, then x ® y ^ in E &lt;g) A F.
(Reduce it to the case where E and F are torsion-free, then to the case where
E and F are finitely generated and use Exercise 29 (b) to show that there is
an A-bilinear mapping/ of E x F into K such thatf(x,y) ^ 0.)

406



EXERCISES

*31. Let K be a commutative field, A the polynomial ring K [X, Y] in
two indeterminates over K , which is an integral domain, and E the ideal
AX + AY of A. Show that in the tensor product E ® A E the element
X &lt;g&gt; Y - Y ® X is #0 and that XY(X ®Y-Y®X)=0 (consider
the A-bilinear mappings of E x E into the quotient module A/E). #

32. Extend the results of no. 10 to the case where A is a non-commutative
ring admitting afield of left fractions K (I, §9, Exercise 15). (Note that if £ t
(1 &lt; i &lt; n) are elements of K, there exists an a # in A such that all the a£ t
belong to A.)

33. Let A be an integral domain. An A-module E is called divisible if for
all x e E and all a ^ in A, there exists y g E such that ccy = x.

(a) Let E, F be two A-modules. Show that if E is divisible, so is E ® A F.
If E is divisible and F is torsion-free, Hom A (E, F) is torsion-free. If E is a
torsion A-module and F is divisible, then E &lt;g&gt; A F = {0}. If E is a torsion A-
module and F is torsion-free, then Hom A (E, F) = {0}.

(b) Show that every injective A-module (§ 2, Exercise 11) is divisible and
conversely that every divisible torsion-free A-module is injective (use criterion
(8) of 2, Exercise 11).

34. Let A be an integral domain, P a projective A-module, P' a projective
submodule of P and % /:P / -&gt;P the canonical injection. Show that for every
torsion-free A-module E, the homomorphism j (g) 1 : P' ® A E -&gt; P ® A E is
injective (reduce it to the case where E is finitely generated and embed E in a
free A-module) .

^f 35. (a) Let K be a field and E a (K, K)-bimodule. Suppose that the
dimensions of E, as a left and right vector space over K, are equal to the
same finite number n. Show that there exists a family (g ( ) of n elements of E,
which is a basis for each of the two vector space structures on E. (Note that
if (£/)i&lt;y&lt; m is a family of m &lt; n elements of E, which is free for each of the
two vector space structures on E and V is the left vector subspace and W
the right vector subspace generated by (b/), either V + W # E, or V n CW
and WnCV are non-empty; in the latter case, if y e V n CW, zgWpi CV,
y + z forms with the b f a family of m + 1 elements which is free for each of
the two vector space structures on E.)

(b) Let F be a subbimodule of E, whose two vector space structures over K
have the same dimension/* &lt; n. Show that there exists a family (e^x^i^n °f
elements of E which is a basis of E for each of its vector space structures and
such that («i)i&lt;i&lt; p is a basis of F for each of its two vector space structures
(same method) .

(c) Let (b j ) 1&lt;j&lt;n _ 1 be a family of n — 1 elements of E, which is free for
each of the two vector space structures on E. Let V (resp. W) be the hyper-
plane generated by the (bj) in E considered as a left (resp. right) vector space.

407



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

Show that ifVcW (resp. W c: V), then necessarily V = W (note that if
a $ W, the set of X e K such that Xa £ W is a left ideal).

*36. (a) Let K be a commutative field and K = K (X) the field of
rational functions in one indeterminate over K (Chapter IV). A (K, K)-
bimodule structure is defined on K as follows: the product t.u of an element
aeKbya left operator t e K is the rational function t(X)u(K) ; the product
a.i of a by a right operator teK. is the rational function u(X)£(X 2 ); the
left (resp. right) vector K-space structure thus defined on K is then 1 -dimen-
sional (resp. 2-dimensional). Deduce examples of (K, K)-bimodules such
that dimensions of the two vector space structures of such a bimodule are
arbitrary integers.

(b) Deduce from (a) an example of a (K, K) -bimodule E whose two vector
space structures have the same dimension and such that there exists a sub-
bimodule F of E whose two vector space structures do not have the same
dimension. *

If 37. (a) Let E be a left vector space (finite-dimensional or otherwise)
and A t (1 &lt; i ^ n) vector subspaces of E. Suppose that, for every sequence
( fl i)i«f&lt;n °f points of E such that a t e A { for all i, the vector subspace of E
generated by the a t is of dimension &lt;m (m an integer ^n). Then prove that
there exists a subspace W of E of dimension h ^ m, containing h + (n — m)
of the subspaces Aj. (Argue by induction on n. Prove first that (for fixed n)
attention may be confined to the case where m &lt; n and dim(Aj) ^ m for
all i; it may also be assumed that A 4 =£ {0} for all i and that the A { are not all

m

of dimension 1. Then argue (for fixed n) by induction on d = 2* dim(A J ).

If for example dim(A n ) ^ 2, consider a 1 -dimensional subspace B n of A n of
dimension 1 and apply the induction hypothesis to A l5 . . ., A n _ 1} B„; con-
clude that there exists a number k such that 1 ^ k ^ m and a A&gt;dimensional
subspace U of E containing k of the Aj, for example A l5 . . ., A fc ; replacing,
if need be, k by an integer k' such that 1 ^ k' &lt; k, show also that it can be
assumed that there exist vectors b x e A, for 1 &lt; z &lt; A; such that b lt . . . , b k
form a basis of U ; then project onto a supplementary subspace of U in E
and use the induction hypothesis.)

(b) Let K be a finite field and let E be an N-dimensional vector space
over K. Let U { (1 ^ i ^ n) be vector subspaces of E such that, for every
subset H of (1, w), the intersection of the Uj such that ieH has dimension
^N — Card(H). Show that the union of the U 4 cannot be equal to E (argue
by duality using (a)).

38. Let K be a commutative field of characteristic and E a finite-dimen-
sional vector space over K. Let p u . . .,p m be projectors of E onto vector sub-
spaces of E such that 1 E = p x + p 2 + • • • + p m - Show that E is the direct

408



EXERCISES

sum of the p t (E) and that the p t are pairwise permutable (take the traces of
the two sides).

39. Let K be a field, L a subfield of K and (K a ) aeI a left directed family of
subfields of K such that L = fl K a . Let E be a vector space over K and

ocel

( a i)i&lt;i&lt;m a finite family of elements of E; show that if the family (a t ) is free
over L, there exists an index a such that (a t ) is free over K a . (Argue by induc-
tion on m — r, where r is the rank of the family (a t ) over K.)

§8

1. Let K be a field, K' a subfield of K and V a non-zero right vector space
over K.

(a) Let V be a K'-structure on V. Show that K' is equal to the set of
(x e K such that, for all x e V, x\x. e V.

(b) Let P be the group of automorphisms of K leaving invariant the ele-
ments of K'. Show that if there exists no element of K not belonging to K'
and invariant under all the automorphisms cr e V, there exists no element of

V not belonging to V and invariant under every bijective dimorphism of V
(relative to an automorphism of K) which leaves invariant all the elements
ofV.

(c) Conversely, let E be a subset of V and G the group of bijective dimor-
phisms of V leaving invariant all the elements of E; for all u e G, let a u be
the corresponding automorphism of K and let V be the group of automorphisms
of K the image of G under the homomorphism u •-»• a u . Suppose that G con-
tains no automorphism of V distinct from the identity automorphism and
that there exists no element of V not belonging to E and invariant under all
the dimorphisms mgG. Show that if K' is the subfield of elements of K in-
variant under all the automorphism a e T, E is a K'-structure on V. (Prove
first that E is an additive subgroup of V containing a basis of V; let K" be
the set of elements [i e K such that the relation x e E implies #ja e E. Show
that the elements of K" are invariant under all a e V and that K" is a subfield
of K; deduce that E is a K'-structure on V.)

2. Let K be a field, K' a subfield of K, V a right vector space over K,

V a K'-structure on V and R' the canonical image of the dual V* in the
dual V* of V (no. 4). For R' to be a generating system of V*, it is necessary
and sufficient that V be finite-dimensional or that K be a finite-dimensional
right vector K'-space (use Exercise 25 of § 7).

^[ 3. Let K be a field, L a subfield of K and let K L denote the field K con-
sidered as a left vector space over L; E = End L (K L ) has canonically a (K, K)-
bimodule structure. The dual (K L )* is contained in E and is a (K, L)-sub-
bimodule of E. When L is contained in the centre of K, the two vector L-space

409



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

structures on E, obtained by restricting to L the field of scalars of the two
vector K-space structures on E, are identical.

Suppose henceforth that L is contained in the centre of K and that the
dimension of K L is finite and equal to n.

(a) Show that (K L )* is 1 -dimensional under its left vector space structure
over K (calculate the dimension of (K L )* over L in two ways).

(b) Show that E is an n-dimensional left vector space over K (same method) .

(c) Let F be a finite-dimensional left vector space over K and F [L] the
corresponding vector space over L. If u ^ is a linear form on K L , show
that the mapping x' &gt;-*■ u o x' of the dual F* of F (considered as a vector
space over L) onto the dual (F [L] )* of F [L] is bijective (use (a)).

T[ 4. Let K be a field of finite rank over its centre Z and L a subfield of K
containing Z.

(a) Show that the left and right vector space structures of K with respect
to L have the same dimension.

(b) Show that properties (a), (b), (c) of Exercise 3 also hold in this case
(if u is a linear form #0 on L z and v a linear form #0 on K L , note that
£.(k o o0 o ) = u o (£o ) for £eK, that £.(w oy o) runs through the dual
(K 2 )* when £ runs through K and use Exercise 3 (c)).

5. Let K be a subfield of a field K such that K is of dimension 2 as a
right vector space over K . Let E be a left vector space over K.

(a) Let E be a subset of E which is a vector space over K and let V be
the largest vector sub-K-space of E ; if W is a vector sub-K -space of E
supplementary to V, show that the vector sub-K-space W of E generated
by W is such that V n W = {0} (note that if an element (x e K does not
belong to K , the relation [ix e E for an x e E implies xeV).

(b) Let Eq be another vector sub-K -space of E and V the largest vector
sub-K-space of Eq. For there to exist a K-automorphism of E mapping E
to Eq, it is necessary and sufficient that V and V have the same dimension
with respect to K, that the codimensions of V in E and V in Eq (with respect
to K ) be equal and that the codimensions of E and E' in E (with respect to
K ) be equal (use (a)).

§9

*1. In an affine space E over a field K, a quadruple (a, b, c, d) of points of E
is called a parallelogram if b — a = c — d, in which case (a, d, c, b) is also a
parallelogram. Show that if K is of characteristic ^ 2 the midpoints of the
ordered pairs (a, c) and (b, d) are then equal; what can be said when K is of
characteristic 2?*

*2. Let E be an affine space over a field of characteristic ^2 and a, b, c, d
410



EXERCISES

any four points of E. Show that if x, y, z, t are the respective midpoints of the
ordered pairs (a, b), (b, c), (c, d), (d, a), the quadruple (x,y, z, t) is a parallelo-
gram (Exercise 1).*

*3. Let K be a commutative field of characteristic ^2, Ean affine plane
over K and a, b, c, d four points of E any three of which do not he on a straight
line. Let T&gt; xy denote the line passing through two distinct points x, y of E.
Suppose that the lines D ob and D cd have a common point e and that T) ad and
D 6c have a common point/. Show that the midpoints of the three ordered pairs
(a, c), (b, d), (e,f) lie on a straight line. What becomes of this property when
D ob and D cd are parallel or when D ad and D bc are parallel? Consider the case
where K is a field with 3 elements. „.

*4. Let K be a field whose characteristic is different from 2 and 3, E an
affine space over K, a, b, c three points of E not on a straight line and a', b', c'
the respective midpoints of the ordered pairs (b, c), (c, a) and (a, b). Show that
(in the notation of Exercise 3) the lines D aa ; D 6b &gt; and D cc . pass through the
barycentre of the three points a, b, c. What becomes of this property when K is
of characteristic 2 or of characteristic 3 ? Generalize to a system of n affinely
independent points. #

5. For a non-empty subset V of an affine space E over a field K with at
least three elements to be a linear variety, it is necessary and sufficient that for
every ordered pair (x, y) of distinct points of V the line D xy passing through
x and y be entirely contained in V. If K has two elements, for V to be a linear
variety, it is necessary and sufficient that the barycentre of any three points of
V belong to V.

6. (a) Let E be an affine space of dimension ^ 2 over a field K. For an
affine mapping u of E into itself to transform every line of E into a parallel line,
it is necessary and sufficient that the linear mapping v associated with abea
homothety t*-+yt of ratio y # belonging to the centre of K. If y = 1, m is a
translation; show that if y # 1, there exists one and only one point a e E such
that u(a) = a. If a is taken as origin of E, u is then identified with a central
homothety for the vector space structure thus determined on E; « is called a
central homothety of the affine space E of centre a and ratio y.

(b) Let %, u 2 be two affine mappings of E into E each of which is either a
translation or a central homothety. Show that u x o u 2 is a translation or a
central homothety of E; if u x , u 2 and u x o u 2 are all three central homotheties
show that their centres lie on a straight line. What can be said when u x and u 2
are central homotheties and u x o u 2 is a translation?

(c) Show that the set of translations and central homotheties is a normal
subgroup H of the affine group of E and that H/T is isomorphic to the

411



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

multiplicative group of the centre of K: show that H can only be commu-
tative if H = T, in other words if the centre of K has only two elements.

Tf 7. Let E (resp. E') be an affine space of finite dimension n ^ 2 over
field K with at least 3 elements (resp. over a field K') and let u be an injective
mapping of E into E' mapping any three points in a straight line in E to three
points in a straight line and such that the affine linear variety generated by
«(E) in E' is equal to E'.

(a) Show that u maps every system of affinely independent points of E to a
system of affinely independent points (use Exercise 5).

(b) Let D l5 D 2 be two parallel lines in E and T&gt;' 1} D 2 the lines of E' con-
taining respectively m(Dj) and m(D 2 ). Show that D£ and D 2 are in the same
plane; if further u is surjective, show that T&gt;[ and D 2 are parallel (in the con-
trary case, show that there would be 3 points not in a straight line in E whose
images under u would be in a straight line) (cf. Exercise 17).

(c) Suppose henceforth that if D x and D 2 are parallel lines in E, the lines
of E' containing respectively u(Dx) and w(D 2 ) are parallel. Show that if an
origin a in E and the origin a' = u{a) in E' are taken, there exists an iso-
morphism a of K onto a subfield K x of K' such that if E is considered as a
vector space over K and E' as a vector space over K ls u is an injective semi-linear
mapping (relative to a) of E into E' (§ 1, no. 13). (Consider first the case
n = 2 ; given a basis (e 1} e 2 ) of E, show that for any two elements a, (3 of K, the
points (a + ^)e 1 and (a(3)&lt;?i of E can be constructed starting with the points
0, e 1} e 2 , &lt;x£ 1} $e x by constructing parallels to given lines and intersections of
given lines; deduce that u(Xej) = X^^), where a is an isomorphism of K onto
a subfield of K', then show that also w(X&lt;? 2 ) = Wu(e 2 ) by considering the line
joining the points "ke x and ~ke 2 . Pass finally from here to the case where n is
arbitrary, arguing by induction on n.) If u is bijective, show that K x = K\

(d) Extend the result of (c) to the case where K is a field with 2 elements
assuming also that u maps every system of affinely independent points of E to
a system of affinely independent points of E'.

8. Let E be a left affine space over a field K and T its translation space.
(a) For a mapping/ of E into a left vector space L over K to be affine, it
is necessary and sufficient that

f(t + x)-f(x)=f(t+y)-f(y)
f(kt + x) -f(x) = X/(t + *) -/(*))

for all X e K, t e T, x, y in E. Let x h&gt; [#] be the canonical injection of E into
the vector space Kg E) of formal linear combinations of elements of E and let N
be the subspace of Kg E) generated by the elements

[t + *] - [*] - [t + y] + [y]
[Xt + x] - 0] - X[t + *] + X[*]

412



EXERCISES

for X g K, t e T, *, y in E; finally, let V be the quotient space of Kj E) by N and
§ the mapping of E into V which associates with every xeE the class of [x]
modulo N. Then &lt;{&gt; is an affine mapping and for every affine mapping / of
E into a left vector space L over K, there exists one and only one linear map-
ping g of V into L such that/* = g ° &lt;f&gt;.

(b) Let § : T -&gt; V be the linear mapping associated with &lt;{&gt;, so that
&lt;j&gt;(t + x) — &lt;}&gt;(#) = &lt;J&gt;o(*)« Show that (j&gt; (and therefore also &lt;f&gt;o) is injective
(consider the mapping x \-&gt; x — a of E into T for some aeE); for every
family {\) ie i of elements of K with finite support and every family (* t ) l6l of
elements of E,

Z, X t &lt;j)(* t ) = &lt;j&gt; (^ \xA if Z\ =

2., \§(x % ) = (x^ol^ V-~ x \ x \) if 2*\ = [L ^ 0.

Deduce that &lt;j&gt; (T) is a hyperplane passing through in V and §(E) a hyper-
plane parallel to § (T).

9. Let K be a finite field with q elements and V an n-dimensional vector
space over K.

(a) Show that the set of sequences (x lt x 2i . . . , x m ) of m ^ n vectors of V
forming a free system has cardinal equal to

(q n - mq n -g)---(q n -q m - 1 )

(argue by induction on n).

(b) Deduce from (a) that the cardinal of the set of m-dimensional linear
varieties in an n-dimensional projective space over K is equal to

(q n+1 - l)(g w+1 - q)...(q n+1 - q m )
(^« + i _ l)(0» + i _ q)...(q m + 1 - q m )

10. In an w-dimensional projective space P(V) over a field K, a projective
basis is a set S of n + 2 points any two of which form a projectively free system.
IfS = (a i ) 0&lt;1&lt;n + 1 andS' = {a[) Q &lt;i&lt;n+ x are any two projective bases of P(V),
show that there exists a transformation /ePGL(V) such that f(a { ) = a\ for
&lt; t &lt; n + 1. For this transformation to be unique, it is necessary and
sufficient that K be commutative. (Reduce it to the case where a\ ~ a t for all i
and note that it is always possible to write (in the notation of no. 6) a t = n(bi),

where (i,) K i&lt;» +1 is a basis of V and b = b x + b 2 H h b n+1 .) *Give an

example where K is a field of quaternions and there exists an infinite set T of
points of P(V) any n + 1 of which form a projectively free system and a trans-
formation /ePGL(V) , distinct from the identity, leaving invariant all the
points of T.*

11. Let V be a 2-dimensional vector space over a field K and a, b, c, d four

413



LINEAR ALGEBRA



distinct points of the projective line P(V). The cross-ratio of the quadruple

(a, b, c, d), denoted by , , is the set of elements £ e K such that there exist

two vectors u, v in V for which (in the notation of no. 6) a = tc(u), b = tc(v),
c = tz(u + v), d = rc(u + Z,v). This definition extends immediately to any
quadruple of distinct points of a set with a projective line structure (no. 11).

(a) Show that , is the set of conjugates of an element ^ 1 of the multi-
plicative group K* and conversely that, when a, b, c, are distinct points of
P(V) and p the set of conjugates of an element ^ 1 of K*, there exists a point

d e P(V) such that , = p. For d to be unique, it is necessary and sufficient

that p consist of a single point.

(b) Show that



and



Ta bl _ p al _ |"a bT
[c d\ ~[d c\~ [d c\



(denoting by p" 1 (resp. 1 — p) the set of conjugates X£ -1 X -1 = (X^X -1 ) -1
(resp. 1 - X£X -1 = X(l - ^)X _1 ), where \ is an element of p).

(c) Let (a, b, c, d), {a', b\ c', d') be two quadruples of distinct points of
P(V). For there to exist a bijective semi-linear mapping of V onto itself such
that the bijective mapping/ of P(V) onto itself, obtained when passing to the
quotients, satisfies the conditions f(a) = a', f(b) = b', f(c) = c', f(d) = d',
it is necessary and sufficient that there exist an automorphism cr of K such that



K b '] _ \ a b T
[d' c'\ ~[d c\'



For there to exist a transformation/ of the projective group PGL(V) satisfying
the above conditions, it is necessary and sufficient that



K b '] _ \ a b ]
[d' c'\ ~ [d c\'



12. Let P(V) be a (left) projective space of finite dimension n over a field K.
Show that there exists on the set of projective hyperplanes of P(V) an n-
dimensional (right) projective space structure over K canonically isomorphic
to that of P(V*) (V* being the dual of V). If M is a linear variety of dimension
r &lt; n in P(V), derive an (n — r — 1) -dimensional projective space structure
on the set of projective hyperplanes containing M. In particular if M is of

414



EXERCISES



1 2 of a quadruple (H l5 H 2 , H 3 , H 4 )

of distinct hyperplanes containing M can be defined. Show that if D &lt;= P(V)
is a line not meeting M and a { is the intersection of D with H 4 (1 ^ i ^ 4), then

Tfli a 2 ~\ _ THi H 2 "|
U « 3 J " LH 4 H 3 J-

*13. In a projective plane P(V) over a field K of characteristic ^2, let
a, b, c, d be four points forming a projective basis (Exercise 10) ; denoting by
D^j, the line passing through two distinct points x,y of P(V), let e,f g be the
points of intersection of the lines D ab and T&gt; cd , D ac and D bd , D ad and D bc
respectively; let h be the point of intersection of D bc and D e/ ; show that

= {— 1} {"theorem of the complete quadrilateral" ; reduce it to the case where

D ad is the line at infinity of an affine plane). What is the corresponding result
when K is of characteristic 2?*

14. In a projective plane P(V) over a field K with at least three elements,
let D, D' be two distinct lines. In order that, for any distinct points a, b, c
of D, a', b', c' of D', the intersection points r of D ab , and D ba ., q of D ac &gt; and D co /,
p of D 6c , and D cb , lie on a straight line, it is necessary and sufficient that K
be commutative {"Pappus's theorem" ; reduce it to the case where q and r are on
the line at infinity of an affine plane) . Apply this theorem to the projective
space of lines of P(V) (Exercise 12).

15. In a projective plane over a field K with at least three elements, let
s, a, b, c, a', b', c' be seven distinct points such that {s, a, b, c} and {s, a', b', c'}
are projective bases (Exercise 10) and the lines D sa , D sb , D sc pass respectively
through a', b', c' . Show that the intersection points r of D a6 and T) a r b &gt;, p of D bc
and D bV , q of D co and D c / a , lie on a straight line {"Desargues's theorem" ; method
analogous to that of Exercise 14).

16. {a) Let E = P(V) and E' = P(V') be two projective spaces of the same
dimension n ^ 2 over two fields K, K' respectively and let u be a bijective
mapping of E onto E', mapping any three points on a straight line to three
points on a straight line. Show that there exist an isomorphism a of K onto K'
and a bijective semi-linear mapping &amp; of V onto V (relative to a) such that u
is the mapping obtained from v when passing to the quotients {"fundamental
theorem of projective geometry" ; use Exercise 7). Suppose also that V = V and K
is commutative; for u to be a projective mapping, it is necessary and sufficient

that also \ ,,{ , I = , for every quadruple {a, b, c, d) of distinct points

on a straight line in P(V).

415



LINEAR ALGEBRA



(b) Let/&gt; be an integer such that 1 &lt; p ^ n — 1. Show that the first con-
clusion of (a) holds when the image under u of every /(-dimensional projective
linear variety is contained in a /(-dimensional projective linear variety.

17. Let V be a vector space of finite dimension n over a field K, (&lt;?i)i&lt;t&lt; n a
basis of V, K' a subfield of K and V the w-dimensional vector space over K'
generated by the e t . Give an example of an injective mapping of V into V,
mapping any three points on a straight line of the affine space V to three points
on a straight line in the affine space V, but not necessarily mapping two parallel
lines to sets contained in two parallel lines. (Embed V in the projective space E
canonically associated with it and consider a projective transformation u of E
into itself such that the inverse image under u of the hyperplane at infinity is
distinct from this hyperplane and contains no point of V; for example K can
be taken to be infinite and K' finite.)

Tf 18. Let E = P(V) be a projective plane over a field K and u a bijective
mapping of E onto itself, arising when passing to the quotients from a bijective
semi-linear mapping v of V onto itself, relative to an automorphism a of K.

(a) Show that the four following properties are equivalent: (a) for all
x e E, x, u(x) and u 2 (x) lie on a straight line; ((J) every line of E contains a point
invariant under u; (y) through every point of E there passes a line invariant
under u; (8) for every line D of E, the three line D, w(D) and u 2 (D) have a
common point. (Show first that (a) and (y) are equivalent; deduce by duality
(Exercise 12) that (p) and (8) are equivalent; prove finally that (y) implies (p)
and deduce by duality that ((J) implies (y).)

(b) Suppose that u has the properties stated in (a). Show that if there exists
in E a line D invariant under u and containing only a single point invariant
under u, u arises from a transvection v of V when passing to the quotients
(§ 10, Exercise 11). (Show that every line invariant under u contains a; by con-
sidering a line not passing through a, show that there exists a line D passing
through a and containing at least two points invariant under u; conclude that
all the points of D are necessarily invariant under u.)

(c) Suppose that u has the properties stated in (a). Show that if there exists
in E a line E invariant under u and containing only two points invariant under
u, u arises from a dilatation v of V when passing to the quotients (§ 10, Exercise
11). (If a, b are the two points of D invariant under u, show that every line
invariant under u passes through a or through b; then note that there exist at
least two other points c, d distinct from a, b and invariant under u and therefore
the line D cd passes through aor b; conclude by proving that all the points of
D cd are invariant under u.)

(d) Suppose that u has the properties stated in (a) and that every line of E
invariant under u contains at least three distinct points invariant under «;
then there exists in E a projective basis (Exercise 10) each point of which is
invariant under «; conclude that there exists a basis (^)i&lt;i&lt; 3 °f V such that u

416



EXERCISES

arises from a semi-linear mapping v of V into itself such that v(e^) = e x for
1 ^ i &lt; 3, when passing to the quotients. The set of points of E invariant under
u is then the projective plane P(V ), where V is the vector space over the field
K of invariants of a, generated by e lt e 2 , e z .

(e) Suppose henceforth that u satisfies the conditions of (a) and (d) and that
neither u nor u 2 is the identity. Show that there exists yeK such that y° = y
and

(i) (S G - IY = y(5° - 5)

for all £ e K (use conditions (a) of (a) and the existence of Z, e K such that
X? # £). Show that y ¥" - 1 and that, for all £ e K such that £° ^ £,

(2) (1 + y)^y = y£(l + y)

(apply (1) replacing \ by £ 2 ) ; extend (2) to all £ e K by noting that £ = tj — £,

where v)° 7^ tq and £° ^ £. Conclude that y ^ 1, then deduce from (1) and

(2) that

(3) F-O+YtfO+Y)- 1

for all £ e K and that y + y ~ x belongs to the centre of K. Obtain the converse.
♦Give an example where y does not belong to the centre of K, but where
y + y _1 is in this centre. #

*19. Let K be a commutative field, JK. the projective field obtained by ad-
joining to K a point at infinity (no. 9) and/and g two elements of K(X). Show
that, writing A(X) = f(g(K)), iff, g, h are the canonical extensions of/, g&gt; h to
&amp;, then A =f°g.*

§10

1. (a) Let E be a right A-module. On the additive group E r (with r $s 1) an
external law of composition is defined with M,(A) as set of operators, denoting
by x.P, for every element * = (»,) ul&lt;r of E r and every square matrix
P = (a tf ) eM r (A), the element y = (y f ) of E r such that

r

i/i = ^XjOLji (1 ^ i ^ r).

This external law defines with the additive law on E r a right M r (A) -module
structure on E r ; by restricting the ring of operators of the ring of scalar matrices
/. a, the product A-module structure on E r is recovered. Show that for the
A-module E to have a generating system of r elements, it is necessary and
sufficient that the M r (A)-module E r be monogenous.

(b) Let (*i) 1&lt;J&lt;n be a generating system of E and (y i ) 1&lt;i ^ m a family of
elements of E (resp. a generating system of E). Let z, z', z" be three elements
of E m+n such that z x = *, for 1 &lt; i ^ n, z n+j = for 1 ^j^m, z\ = x { for

417



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

1 &lt; x &lt; «, z' n+j = y s for 1 ^j &lt; n, z\ = for 1 &lt; i ^ w, z£ + , = y y for
1 &lt; j &lt; n. Show that there exist two invertible matrices P, Q of M n+m (A)
such that z' = z.P (resp. z" = z.Q).

(c) If A is commutative, u P : x i-&gt; x.P is an endomorphism of the A-module
E r and the mapping P *-*■ u P is a homomorphism of the ring M r (A) into the
ring End A (E r ). If E is a faithful A-module this homomorphism is injective.

2. (a) Let X be a square matrix over a ring A, which can be written as an
upper triangular matrix (X tj ) of matrices (1 ^ i ^ p, 1 ^ j &lt; p). Show that
if each of the square matrices X u (1 ^ x ^ /&gt;) is invertible, so is X and X~ x
can be written as an upper triangular matrix (7 jy ) (1 ^ i &lt; p, 1 ^j^p)
corresponding to the same partition of the indexing set. When A is a field,
prove that this sufficient condition for X to be invertible is also necessary.

(b) Give an example of a ring A and a matrix I j (with a e A, b e A)
which is invertible without either a or b being invertible in A and whose inverse

, ,, J is such that b' # and c' # (take A to be the endomorphism ring of
an infinite-dimensional vector space) .

3. Let A be the quotient ring Z/30Z. Show that in the matrix

n i-n

\0 2 3/

over the ring A, the two rows are linearly independent but any two columns
are linearly dependent.

4. Let A be a ring, C its centre, B the ring of matrices M n (A), A the additive
subgroup of A generated by the elements ocfi — (3a for a e A, p e A, and D the
additive subgroup of B generated by the matrices XY — YXfor XeB, 7eB;
A and D are G-modules. For every matrix X = ( £ y ) e B, let (X) be the element

n

Zy | iy of A/A, where, for all a e A, a denotes the class of a mod. A. Show that 6

is a surjective homomorphism of B onto A/A, whose kernel is equal to D, so
that B/D is isomorphic to A/A as a C-module. (Observe that D contains the
matrices aE w and the matrices a(E {i — E^) for a e A and i # j.)

Tf 5. Let A be a ring, L, M, N any three indexing sets U = (a hll ) a matrix
of A LxM and V = (b^) a matrix of A MxN ; if, for every ordered pair
(X, v) e L x N, the family (a^nv) ([*£ M) has finite support, the element

c Kv = 2i, flxn^uv is defined and it is also said that the matrix (c Xv ) is the product
UVofUby V. When the products UV and UV" are defined, so is U{V + V)

418



EXERCISES



and UV' + UV = U(V + V); is the converse true? Give an example of
three infinite matrices, U, V, Wsuch that the products UV, VW, U(VW) and
(UV) W are defined but U(VW) # (UV)W (take U to be a matrix with one
row all of whose elements are equal to 1, Wits transpose and Fa matrix all of
whose elements are 0, 1 or — 1 and which has only a finite number of elements
7^0 in each row and each column. Determine by induction the elements of V
such that UV = but VW has a single element #0.)

6. Let X be a matrix with m rows and n columns over a field K; show that
the rank rg(X) is equal to the greatest of the ranks of the submatrices of X
with an equal number of rows and columns. (Let rg(Z) = r; if a lt . . ., a r are
r columns of X forming a free system in K™ and a basis of K™ is formed with
these r vectors and m — r vectors of the canonical basis, show that the com-
ponents of Ox, . . . , a r over the r other vectors of the canonical basis form a
matrix of rank r.)

7. Let X be a matrix with m rows and n columns over a field K; if r is the
rank of X, show that the rank of a submatrix with m rows and s columns,
obtained by suppressing n — s columns of X, is ^r + s — n.

8. Let X = (&lt;x iy ) be a matrix with m rows and n columns over a field K.
For X to be of rank 1, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist in K a
family (X,) x &lt; t ^ m of m elements not all zero and a family (jx y ) x &lt; j &lt; n of n elements
not all zero such that oc y = X^ for every ordered pair of indices.

9. Let X, Y be two matrices with m rows and n columns over a field K; if
there exist two square matrices P, P x of order m and two square matrices
Q, Q ± of order n such that Y = PXQ and X = P X XQ X , show that Zand Fare
equivalent.

10. Let X, X', Y, Y' be four square matrices of order n over a ring A, such
that X is invertible. For there to exist two invertible square matrices P, Q of
order n such that X' = PXQ and Y' = PYQ, it is necessary and sufficient that
X' be invertible and that the matrices YX~ X and Y'X'~ X be similar.

11. Let E be a right vector space over a field K, of dimension ^ 1, and H a
hyperplane of E. Every endomorphism u of E leaving invariant each of the
elements of H gives, on passing to the quotients, an endomorphism of the 1-
dimensional quotient space E/H, an endomorphism which is therefore of the
form x ^x\x.(x), where p(x) e K is such that pi(*X) = X'^^X for X e K*. An
automorphism of E leaving invariant the elements of H is called a transvection of
hyperplane H if the corresponding automorphism of E/H is the identity and a
dilatation of hyperplane H otherwise; when u is a dilatation, the set of elements
fx(*) for x e E/H which is a class of conjugate elements in the multiplicative
group K*, is called the class of the dilatation u.

419



n LINEAR ALGEBRA

(a) Show that for every dilatation there exists one and only one supple-
mentary line of H, invariant under the dilatation.

(b) Let (j&gt; be a linear form on E such that H = $ (0) ; show that for every
transvection u of hyperplane H there exists a unique vector a e H such that
u(x) = x + a$(x) for all *eE. Let T(E, H) be the subgroup of GL(E) con-
sisting of the automorphisms leaving invariant each element of H; show that
the transvections of hyperplane H form a normal commutative subgroup
0(E, H) of r(E, H) isomorphic to the additive group H; the quotient group
r(E, H)/®(E, H) is isomorphic to the multiplicative group K*. For I\E, H)
to be commutative, it is necessary and sufficient that one of the two following
conditions be satisfied: (a) K is a field with two elements; (J3) K is commutative
and dimE = 1.

(c) Suppose that E is finite-dimensional; show that for every transvection u
there exists a basis of E such that the matrix of u with respect to this basis has
all its diagonal elements equal to 1 and at most one other element #0.

(d) Show that the centralizer (I, § 5, no. 3) of the group 0(E, H) in the group
GL(E) is the composition Z(E) 0(E, H) = 0(E, H)Z(E) of 0(E, H) and the
centre Z(E) of GL(E) (cf. § 1, Exercise 26). The only automorphisms
belonging to this centralizer and leaving invariant at least one element #0 of
E are the transvections of the group 0(E, H). If K has at least 3 elements, the
centralizer of T(E, H) in GL(E) is equal to Z(E).

(e) Show that the normalizes (I, §5, no. 3) of 0(E, H) and T(E, H) in
GL(E) are both equal to the subgroup consisting of the automorphisms leaving
H invariant.

f 12. Let E be a right vector space of dimension ^ 1 over a field K. Let
F(E) denote the normal subgroup of GL(E) consisting of the automorphisms u
such that the kernel of 1 E - u is of finite codimension (hence F(E) = GL(E)
if E is finite-dimensional). Let SL(E) denote the normal subgroup of GL(E)
generated by all the transvections (Exercise 1 1) ; it is contained in F(E).

(a) If dim E ^ 2, show that for every ordered pair of non-zero vectors x,y
of E, there exists a transvection or product of two transvections, which maps
X toy (in other words SL(E) operates transitively on E — {0}).

(b) Let V, W be two hyperplanes of E, x = x + V a class mod. V distinct
from V and y Q = y + W a class mod. W distinct from W. Show that if
dim E ^ 2, there exists a transvection or product of two transvections,
which maps V to W and x to J&gt; (consider first the case where V and W are
distinct).

(c) If dim E &gt; 2, show that any two transvections distinct from the identity
are conjugate in the group F(E).

(d) If dim E ^ 3, show that any two transvections distinct from the
identity are conjugate in the group SL(E) (reduce it with the aid of {b) to the

420



EXERCISES

case where the hyperplanes of the two transvections are identical, then
use (a)).

(e) Suppose that dim E = 2. For any two transvections to be conjugate in
SL(E), it is necessary and sufficient that the subgroup Q,of K* generated by
the squares of elements of K* be identical with K*. (If u is a transvection distinct
from the identity, a a vector of E which is not invariant under u and
b = u(a) — a, show that, for every transvection u' conjugate to u in SL(E),
u'(a) — a = ak + by., with y. = or (x e Q; for this use the fact that in a group
G every product sts~ 1 t is a product of squares.)

(/) Suppose that dim E $s 2. For two dilatations u, u' to be such that there
exists a v e SL(E) such that u' = vuv' 1 , it is necessary and sufficient that the
classes (Exercise 11) of u and u' be the same (use (b)). Deduce that if the class
of a dilatation is contained in the commutator group of K*, this dilatation
belongs to the group SL(E) (observe that (vuv'^w 1 = i^air 1 !* -1 )).

1 13. Let E be a right vector space of dimension ^2 and H a hyperplane
ofE.

(a) Show that every automorphism u belonging to F(E) (Exercise 12) is the
product of an automorphism of SL(E) and possibly a dilatation of the hyper-
plane H (proceed by induction on the codimension of the kernel of 1 E — u,
using Exercises 12(a) and 12(/)).

(b) Show that SL(E) contains the commutator group of F(E) and is identical
with this group except when E is a space of dimension 2 over the field with 2
elements. (To show that SL(E) contains the commutator group of F(E), use
(a) and Exercise 12(f). To see that SL(E) is contained in the commutator
group of F(E), except in the case indicated, show that for every homomorphism
of F(E) into a commutative group, the image of a transvection is the identity
element, using Exercises 11(b) and 12(c).)

(c) Show that SL(E) is equal to its commutator group except when
dim E = 2 and K has 2 or 3 elements. (If dim E $s 3, note that every trans-
vection u can be written as uwv~ 1 w~ x i where &amp; is a transvection and w e SL(E),
using Exercise 12(d). If dim E = 2, note first that every automorphism u whose

matrix with respect to a basis of E is of the form ( A is a product of

transvections, arguing as in (a); then consider the commutator uvu'h' 1 ,
where v is the transvection whose matrix with respect to the same basis is



G !)•'



If 14. Let E be a vector space of dimension ^2 over a field K.

(a) Show that the projective group PGL(E) is canonically isomorphic to the
quotient of the linear group GL(E) by its centre (isomorphic to the multiplica-
tive group of the centre of K, cf. § 1, Exercise 26).

421



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

(b) Let PSL(E) denote the canonical image of the group SL(E) in PGL(E) ;
it is a normal subgroup of PGL(E), containing the commutator group of
PGL(E) when E is finite-dimensional. Show that PSL(E) is a doubly transitive
(cf. I, § 5, Exercise 14) group of permutations of P(E).

(c) Let a ^ be an element of E and let e = Tz{a) e P(E) (in the notation
of § 9, no. 6). Show that the transections of the form x h&gt; x + a§(x) (where
&lt;|&gt; eE* is such that §(a) = 0) constitute a commutative subgroup of SL(E);
if T e is the image of this subgroup in PSL(E), T e is a normal subgroup of the
subgroup O e of PSL(E) leaving e invariant. Show also that the union of the
subgroups conjugate to T e in PSL(E) generates PSL(E).

(d) LetS be a primitive group (I, § 5, Exercise 13) of permutations of a set
F which is equal to its commutator group. Suppose that there exists an element
ceF such that the subgroup O c of 2 leaving c invariant contains a commutative
normal subgroup T c such that the union of the subgroups conjugate to T c in 2
generates 2. Show that under these conditions 2 is simple. (Let A be a normal
subgroup of 2 distinct from the identity; using I, § 5, Exercise 17, show that
2 = A.O c = A.T C and, using the fact that Y c is commutative, deduce that
every commutator in 2 is contained in A.)

(e) Deduce from (c), (d) and Exercise 13(c) that the group PSL(E) is simple
except when dim E = 2 and K has 2 or 3 elements.

* (/) If dim E = n + 1 and K is a field with q elements, show that the
order of PGL(E) is

(q n+1 - i)(? n+1 - ?)---(? n+1 - q n ~ x )q n

(use (a), Exercise 9(a) of § 9, and the fact that K is necessarily commutative
(V, § 11, Exercise 14 and VIII, § 11, no. 1, Theorem 1)).*

(g) Show that if dim E = 2 and K is a field with 2 (resp. 3) elements,
PSL(E) is isomorphic to the symmetric group &lt;£ 3 (resp. the alternating group
2l 4 ). (Considering PSL(E) as a group of permutations of P(E), note that it
contains every transposition (resp. every cycle (a b c) and use/).)

(h) Show that, except in the cases considered in (g), every normal subgroup
of SL(E) distinct from SL(E) is contained in the centre of SL(E) (use (d) and
the fact that every transvection is a commutator in SL(E) (Exercise 13(c))).

^ 15. Let A be a ring; for every integer n &gt; 1, A n is canonically identified
with the submodule of A (N) consisting of the elements whose coordinates of
index $s n are and A^ denotes the complementary submodule consisting of
the elements whose coordinates of index &lt;n are 0. Every endomorphism
u e GL n (A) is identified with the automorphism of A (N) whose restriction to
A" is u and whose restriction to A^ is the identity, so that GL n (A) is identified
with a subgroup of GL(A (N) ) ; let F denote the subgroup of GL(A (N) ) the union
of the GL n (A), in other words the subgroup leaving invariant the elements of
the canonical basis of A (N) except for a finite number of them (cf. Exercise 12).

422



EXERCISES



Let T n be the subgroup of GL n (A) generated by the B tt (X) for ^ * &lt; n,
^ j &lt; n, i # j, X e A (no. 13) and let T be the subgroup of F the union of

the T n .

(a) Show that for n ^ 3, T n is equal to its commutator group.

(b) Let a, b be two invertible elements of A. Show that

c:)-c&gt;-c:)-'(o&gt;

. (aba-^b- 1 0\
where P, Q, P', Q' belong to T 2 . Deduce that the matrix ^ j j

belongs to T 2 . . .

(c) Deduce from (b) that the commutator group of GL n (A) is contained in
T 2n (replace A by M n (A) in (&amp;)). Conclude (using (a)) that the commutator
group of F is equal to T.

16. (a) Let U be a square matrix of order n over the field Q, all of whose
non-diagonal elements are equal to the same rational number r &gt; and whose
diagonal (d lt ...,d n )is such that d t ^ r for all i and d i &gt; r except perhaps for
one value of i. Show that U is invertible (if x = (x,)i &lt;(&lt;ll is a solution of the
equation U. x = 0, show that the x t all have the same sign and deduce that they
are all zero).

(b) Let E be a finite set with m elements denoted by a { (1 &lt; i ^ m) and
(A y ) UKn a family of n subsets of E, distinct from one another; suppose that
Card(A^n A,) = r ^ 1 for every ordered pair (i,j) of distinct elements of
(1, n). Show that necessarily n ^ m. (Let V = (%) be the matrix of type (m, n)
such that % = 1 when a t e A y , % = otherwise. Apply (a) to the matrix
*V. V of order n.)

If 17. Let K be a field (commutative or otherwise), E an n-dimensional right
vector space over K and u an endomorphism of E.

(a) Show that if n &gt; 1 and u is not a central homothety, there exists a basis
of E such that the matrix of u with respect to this basis is of the form (oty) with

n-l

&lt;x iy = for j &gt; i + 1 and Z, a, &gt;i+1 = 1 (argue by induction on n).

(b) Show that if n &gt; 2, there exists a basis of E such that the matrix of u
with respect to this basis is of the form (a y ) with a w = for j &gt; i + 1 and

n-l

2 a, J + i = 0. (Argue by induction on n using (a), noting that it amounts to
the same to prove the proposition for u or for u + yl E , where y belongs to the
centre of K, and studying separately the case where u is of rank 1 or 2.)

(c) Let A = (a,,) be a matrix with the properties described in (b). Also let S
be the matrix of order n (e„) such that e,, = except when i =j + 1, in which

423



II LINEAR ALGEBRA

case e j + i t j — 1. Show that there exists a matrix B = ((3 W ) of order n such that
A = X£ B ' n + (BS - SB) with X e K. (Take B such that p 41 = for 1 ^ i &lt; n
and p Jy = for j &gt; i + 2.)

(d) Suppose that K is commutative. Deduce from (c) that every endomor-
phism u of E such that Tr(u) = can be written as vw — wv, where v and w are
endomorphisms of E.

1. Let A be a commutative monoid, written additively, with its identity
element denoted by 0. Let Z (A) be the algebra of A over Z (III, § 2, no. 6), that
is a commutative ring, which is a free Z-module with a basis (X°) agA and
the multiplication (aX a )(£X T ) = abX. a+T . For every Z-module, we write
E (A) = E ® z Z (A) , every element of E (A&gt; hence being written uniquely in the

form Z z a (g&gt; X a , with z a e E, the family (z a ) having finite support. For

every Z-module homomorphism f: E -&gt; E', let / &lt;A) denote the Z (A) -module
homomorphism / (g) 1 : E (A) -&gt; E' (A) . Similarly, if A' is another additive
monoid with its identity element denoted by and if a: A -&gt; A' is a monoid
homomorphism, a(E) denotes the homomorphism E (A) -&gt;E (A,) such that
a(E)(z„ ® X°) = z a ® X a(0) . (E (A) ) (A,) is identified with E (AxA,) by associating

with Z ( 2 z a a , ® X° ) (8) X°' the element Z z a a' ® X (a '°'&gt;. Finally,

o'eA'xaeA * / 0,0' '

let s(E) denote the homomorphism E (A) -&gt; E mapping Z z a ® X a to Z z a .

(a) Let E be a Z-module, (E ) oeA a graduation on E of type A and, for all
a e A, let/&gt; be the projector E -&gt;- E a corresponding to the decomposition of E

as the direct sum of the E . For all xeE, let &lt;j&gt; B (*) = Z p a {x) ® X a . Show

that the homomorphism &lt;j&gt; E : E -&gt; E &lt;A) thus defined has the following proper-
ties:

(1) e(E) o &lt;}&gt; E = 1 E

(2) 8(E) o fa = $&gt; o &lt;j, E ,

where S: A -» A x A is the diagonal mapping.

Show that a bijection of the set of graduations on E of type A is thus defined on
to the set of homomorphisms of E into E (A) satisfying conditions (1) and (2).

(b) Let E, F be two graded Z-modules of type A. For a homomorphism
f: E -&gt; F to be graded of degree 0, it is necessary and sufficient that
&lt;{&gt; F of =jf (A) o fa. For a submodule E' of E to be graded, it is necessary and
sufficient that &lt;j&gt; E (E') &lt;= E' &lt;A) .

(c) Let A be a ring; A &lt;A) = A &lt;g&gt; z Z (A) is given a ring structure such that
(a &lt;8&gt;X°)(6 &lt;8&gt;X T ) = {ab) &lt;g&gt; X a+T . Let (A a ) aeA be a graduation of the additive

424



APPENDIX



group A; for this graduation to be compatible with the ring structure on A and
1 e Ao, it is necessary and sufficient that &lt;j&gt; A : A -&gt; A (A) be a ring homomorphism.
State and prove an analogous result for graded A-modules.



APPENDIX



1. Let A be a pseudo-ring and M a left pseudomodule over A such that for
all z =£ in M, z e Az. Show that if x, y are two elements of M such that
Ann(*) &lt;= Ann(y) in A, there exists an endomorphism u of M such that
u( x ) = y (prove that the relation bx = ax for a, b in A implies by = ay).



425



CHAPTER III



Tensor Algebras, Exterior
Algebras, Symmetric Algebras



Recall the exponential notation introduced in Chapter I, of which we shall make frequent
use (I, § 7, no. 8) :

Let (tfjJa.eL be a family of pairwise permutable elements of a ring A; for every
mapping a:L -&gt; N of finite support we shall write

*■ = n xt™.

If$is another mapping ofL into N of finite support, a + (3 denotes the mapping

X ■-*■ a (X) + p(X)

o/L m/o N; rw/A this law of composition the set N (L) of mappings ofL into N of finite
support is the free commutative monoid derived from L and

For a// aeN (L) , we jwrifc |a| = 2, a(X) gN; *^n |a + (3| = |a| + |P|; |a| is

called the order of the "multiindex" a. For all XgL, let S x denote the element o/N (L)
such that \(X) = 1, S^((x) = for \x ^ X {Kronecker index); the \for XgL
are ffo only elements o/"N (L) of order 1. N (L) w gKwi /fo ordering induced by the product
ordering on N L , jo M&lt;z£ /A&lt;? relation a ^ p W equivalent to "a(X) ^ P(X) /or aW
X e L"; then the multiindex X ■-»■ p(X) — a(X) w denoted by p — a, jo lAirf if w £fo
ttm'tfw multiindex such that a + (P — a) = p. For a/£ a e N (L) , Jfor* are on/y a
finite number ofmultiindices P ^ a; the B K are the minimal elements of the set N (L) — {0};
the relation a ^ p implies [a| &lt; |P| and if both a &lt; p and |a| = |p|, then a = p.

Finally, we write a! = 1 1 (a(X)) !, which is meaningful since 0! = 1.

X 6 Zj

From § 4 to § 8 inclusive, A denotes a commutative ring and, unless otherwise stated,
the algebras considered are assumed to be associative and unital and the algebra homo-
morphisms are assumed to be unital.

427



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS



§ 1. ALGEBRAS

1. DEFINITION OF AN ALGEBRA

Definition 1 . Let A be a commutative ring. An algebra over A (or an A-algebra,
or simply an algebra, when no confusion is to be feared) is a set E with a structure
defined by giving the following :

(1) an A-module structure on E;

(2) an A-bilinear mapping (II, § 3, no. 5) of E x E into E.

The A-bilinear mapping of E x E into E occurring in this definition is
called the multiplication of the algebra E; it is usually denoted by (x,y) *-&gt; x.y,
or simply (#, y) \-&gt; xy.

Let (ai) JeI and ((3 y ) yeJ be two families of elements of A, of finite support
(I, § 2, no. 1). Then, for all families (*t) JeI and (yy)/ e j of elements of E, the
general distributivity formula (I, § 3, no. 4)

(i) (2 «*)(£ to) = 8 _ 2 ixj («ax**)

holds; in particular

(2) (owc)y = x(&lt;xy) = &lt;z(xy) for a e A, x e E and y e E.

The bilinear mapping (x,y) v-^yx of E x E into E and the A-module
structure on E define an A-algebra structure on E, called opposite to the given
algebra structure. The set E with this new structure is called the opposite
algebra to the algebra E; it is often denoted by E°. The A-algebra E is called
commutative if it is identical with its opposite, in other words if multiplication
in E is commutative. An isomorphism of E onto E° is also called an anti-
automorphism of the algebra E.

When multiplication in the algebra E is associative, E is called an associative
A-algebra. When multiplication in E admits an identity element (necessarily
unique (I, § 2, no. 1)), this element is called the unit element of E and E is
called a unital algebra.

Examples. (1) Every commutative ring A can be considered as an (associative
and commutative) A-algebra.

(2) Let E be a pseudo-ring (I, §8, no. 1). Multiplication on E and the
unique Z-module structure on E define on E an associative Z-algebra struc-
ture.

(3) Let F be a set and A a commutative ring. The set A F of all mappings
of F into A, with the product ring structure (I, § 8, no. 10) and the product

428



SUBALGEBRAS. IDEALS. QUOTIENT ALGEBRAS § 1 .2

A-module structure (II, § 1, no. 5) is an associative and commutative A-
algebra.

(4) Let E be an A-algebra; the internal laws (x, y) i-&gt; xy + yx and
(x, y) \-&gt; xy — yx define (with the A-module structure on E) two A-algebra
structures on E, which are not in general associative; the first law

(*, y)^xy + yx
is always commutative.

Definition 2. Given two algebras E, E' over a commutative ring A, a homomorphism
ofE into E' is a mapping jf:E -&gt; E' such that

(1) fis an A-module homomorphism;

(2) flxy) = f{x)f{y) for allxeE andy e E.

Clearly the composition of two A-algebra homomorphisms is an A-algebra
homomorphism. Every bijective algebra homomorphism is an isomorphism.
Therefore A-algebra homomorphisms may be taken as morphisms of the
species of A-algebra structure (Set Theory, IV, 2, no. 1). We shall always
suppose in what follows that this choice of morphisms has been made. If E,
E' are two A-algebras, let Hom A _ a i g (E, E') denote the set of A-algebra homo-
morphisms of E into E'.

Let E, E' be two algebras each with a unit element. A homomorphism
of E into E' mapping the unit element of E to the unit element of E' is
called a unital homomorphism (or unital algebra morphism) .

2. SUBALGEBRAS. IDEALS. QUOTIENT ALGEBRAS

Let A be a commutative ring and E an A-algebra. If F is a sub-A-module
of W which is stable under the multiplication on E, the restriction to F x F
of the multiplication of E defines (with the A-module structure on F) an
A-algebra structure on F. F, with this structure, is called a subalgebra of the
A-algebra E. Every intersection of subalgebras of E is a subalgebra of E.
For every family (x t ) ieI of elements of E, the intersection of the subalgebras
of E containing all the x t is called the subalgebra of E generated by the family
(*i)tei an d (*i)iei is called a generating system (or generating family) of this sub-
algebra. If u:E -+ E' is an A-algebra homomorphism, the image «(F) of every
subalgebra F of E is a subalgebra of E\

Let E be an associative algebra. For every subset M of E, the set M' of
elements of E which are permutable with all the elements of M is a subalgebra
of E called the centralizer subalgebra of M in E (I, § 1, no. 5). The centralizer
M" of M' in E is also called the bicentralizer of M; clearly M &lt;= M". It follows
that M' is contained in its bicentralizer M"", which is just the centralizer of
M"; but the relation M c M" implies M* c M', so that M' = M* (cf.
Set Theory, III, § 1, no. 7, Proposition 2). If F is a subalgebra of E, the centre
of F is the intersection FnF' of F and its centralizer F' in E. Note that if

429



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

F is commutative, then F«=F' and hence F' =&gt; F"; the bicentralizer F" of F
is in this case the centre of F.

For certain non-associative algebras (for example Lie algebras) the
notions of centralizer of a subalgebra and centre are defined differently
{Lie Groups and Lie algebras, I, § 1, no. 6).

A subset a of an A-algebra E is called a left ideal (resp. right ideal) of E
when a is a sub-A-module of E and the relations xe&lt;\, y e E imply yxea
(resp. xy e a). It amounts to the same to say that a is a left ideal of E or a right
ideal of the opposite algebra E°. A two-sided ideal of E is a subset a of E which
is both a left ideal and a right ideal. When E is associative and admits a unit
element e, then, for a e A and x e E, cue = {&lt;xe)x = x(ox) by virtue of (2) (no. 1)
and hence the (right, left, two-sided) ideals of the ring E (I, § 8, no. 6) are
identical with the (right, left, two-sided) ideals of the algebra E. Every sum and
every intersection of left (resp. right, two-sided) ideals of the algebra E is a left
(resp. right, two-sided) ideal. The intersection of the left (resp. right, resp.
two-sided) ideals containing a subset X of E is called the left (resp. right,
resp. two-sided) ideal of E generated by X.

Let b be a two-sided ideal of an A-algebra E. If x = x' (mod. b) and y = y'
(mod. b), then

x(y — y') e b and (x — x')y' e b
and hence xy = x'y' (mod. b). Hence an internal law can be defined on the
quotient A-module E/b, which is the quotient of the multiplication law
(x,y) i-+xyofE by the equivalence relation x = x' (mod. b) (I, § 1, no. 6).
It is immediately verified that this quotient law is an A-bilinear mapping
of (E/b) x (E/b) into E/b; it therefore defines with the A-module structure
on E/b an A-algebra structure on E/b. E/b, with this algebra structure, is
called the quotient algebra of the algebra E by the two-sided ideal b. The
canonical mapping p: E -&gt; E/b is an algebra homomorphism.

Let E, E' be two A-algebras and k:E-&gt;E' an algebra homomorphism.

The image u(E) is a subalgebra of E' and the kernel b = m(0) is a two-sided
ideal of E; further, in the canonical decomposition of u:

E -^ E/b -U w(E) -U E'
v is an algebra isomorphism.. More generally, all the results of Chapter I, § 8,
no. 9 are still valid (and also their proofs) when the word "ring" is replaced
by "algebra".

Let A be a commutative ring and E an A-algebra. On the set £ = A x E,
we define the following laws of composition :

(k,x) + (n,y) = (X + [l,x +y)
(X,*)(f*,y) = (Xj*,«y + \ix + ty)

X([X, x) = (X[l, A*).

430



DIAGRAMS EXPRESSING ASSOCIATIVITY AND COMMUTATIVITY § 1.3

It is immediately verified that £, with these laws of composition, is an
algebra over A and (1,0) is a unit element of this algebra. The set {0} x E
is a two-sided ideal of £ and x i-&gt; (0, x) is an isomorphism of the algebra E
onto the subalgebra {0} x E, by means of which E and {0} x E are identi-
fied. £ is called the algebra derived from E by adjoining a unit element', it is associa-
tive (resp. commutative) if and only if E is.

3. DIAGRAMS EXPRESSING ASSOCIATIVITY AND COMMUTATIVITY

Let A be a commutative ring and E an A-module; being given a bilinear map-
ping of E x E into E is equivalent to being given an A-linear mapping:

m:E ® A E^E

(II, § 3, no. 5). An A-algebra structure on E is therefore defined by giving
an A-module structure on E and an A-linear mapping of E ® A E into E.

Let E' be another A-algebra and m' : E' &lt;g) A E' -»- E' the A-linear mapping
defining the multiplication of E'. A mapping f: E -&gt; E' is an A-algebra
homomorphism if and only if f is a mapping rendering commutative the
diagram

E( g) A E^4 E'&lt;g&gt; A E'



E &gt;. E'

/

For an A-algebra E to be associative, it is necessary and sufficient (taking
account of the associativity of tensor products, cf. II, § 3, no. 8) that the
diagram of A-linear mappings

E&lt;g) A E® A E mi E® A E
E&lt;g) A E &gt; E

m

be commutative. Similarly, for the A-algebra E to be commutative, it is neces-
sary and sufficient that the diagram of A-linear mappings

E&lt;g) A E — 1-&gt; E® A E

E

be commutative, where cr denotes the canonical A-linear mapping defined by

431



Ill



TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS



&lt;*(* &lt;S&gt; y) = y ® x for x eE, y eE (II, § 3, no. 1, Corollary 2 to Proposition

1).
For all cgE, let tj c denote the A-linear mapping of A into E denned by

the condition v) c (l) = c. For c to be a unit element of E, it is necessary and

sufficient that the two diagrams

E _?iliE® A E E&lt;g) A A-^^E® A E





be commutative (i and V denoting the canonical isomorphisms (II, § 3,
no. 4, Proposition 4)).

Let E be an A-algebra with unit element e and let tj = v\ e (also denoted by
7) E ); then 7)(&lt;xp) = K](a)i](p) = onj(P), for by (2) (no. 1),

(«)(M = («P)« = a(P«);

hence 7) is an A-algebra homomorphism. Observe that the A-module structure
on E can be defined using &gt;), for



(3)



ouc = Y)(a) . x for a e A, x e E



(where, on the right hand side, multiplication is in E). The image of the
homomorphism 7) is a subalgebra of E whose elements commute with all those
of E. The kernel of the homomorphism tj is the annihilator of the element e
of the A-module E; by (3), it is also the annihilator of the A-module E (II,
§ 1, no. 12).

When the algebra E is unital and associative, r^ is a ring homomorphism.
Conversely, let p:A-&gt;B be a ring homomorphism such that the image p(A)
is contained in the centre of B, assuming also that the ring A is commutative;
then an A-algebra structure is defined on B which is associative and unital,
by writing (cf. (3))

X# = p(X) .x for X 6 A, x e E.



4. PRODUCTS OF ALGEBRAS

Let (Ej) JeI be a family of algebras over the same commutative ring A. It is
immediately verified that on the product set E = l g l E te the product A-
module structure (II, § 1, no. 5) and the multiplication

(4) ((*0, (yO) ^ (*.&amp;)

432



RESTRICTION AND EXTENSION OF SCALARS § 1.5

define an A-algebra structure; with this structure, the set E is called the
product algebra of the family of algebras (Ej) i6l .

When all the algebras E, are associative (resp. commutative, resp. unital),
so is their product. Moreover, all the properties stated in I, § 8, no. 10, extend
without modification to arbitrary products of algebras.

5. RESTRICTION AND EXTENSION OF SCALARS

Let A and A be two commutative rings and p : A -&gt; A a ring homomorphism.
If E is an A-algebra, we denote (conforming with II, § 1, no. 13) by p*(E)
the A -module defined by addition on E and the external law

\.x = p(X)# for all X e A and all x e E.

Multiplication in E and the A -module structure on p*(E) define an A -
algebra structure on p*(E). When A is a subring of A and p the canonical
injection, the algebra p*(E) is said to be obtained from E by restricting the
ring A of scalars to A . By an abuse of language, this is also sometimes said
when p is arbitrary.

Let F be an A -algebra. An A -algebra homomorphism F-&gt;p !le (E) is
called a semi-homomorphism (relative to p) or a ^-homomorphism of F into the A-
algebra E; it is also called an A -homomorphism if no confusion arises. If
E, E' are two A-algebras, every A-algebra homomorphism E -&gt; E' is also
an A -algebra homomorphism p*(E) -&gt;- p*(E').

Consider now two commutative rings A and B and a ring homomorphism
p:A-*-B. For every A-module E, the B-module p*(E) = E ® A B, obtained
from E by extending the ring A of scalars to B, has been defined (II, § 5, no. 1).
If E is, also an A-algebra, we shall define on p*(E) a B-algebra structure. For
this, observe that (E ® A B) ® B (E &lt;g) A B) is canonically isomorphic to
(E® A E)&lt;g) A B (II, §5, no. 1, Proposition 3). If m:E&lt;g) A E^E defines
the multiplication on E, the mapping m® 1 B :(E® A E) &lt;g) A B-»E® A B
is therefore canonically identified with a B-linear mapping

m':p*(E)® B p*(E)-&gt;p*(E)

which defines the desired B-algebra structure on p*(E). Hence

(5) (*0P)(* / ®P / ) = (**') &lt;8&gt; (PP')

for x, x' in E, (3 and (3' in B. The B-algebra p*(E) is said to be derived from
the A-algebra E by extending the ring A of scalars to B (by means of p). It
is also denoted by E (B) or E ® A B. When E is associative (resp. commutative,
resp. unital), so is p*(E).

Proposition 1 . For every A-algebra E, the canonical mapping (j&gt; E : x i-&gt; x ® 1
of E into E (B) is an A-homomorphism of algebras. Moreover, for every B-algebra F

433



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

and every A-homomorphism f:E -&gt; F, there exists one and only one B-homomorphism
f: E (B) -&gt; F such that J (x (g) 1) = f(x) for all xeE.

The first assertion follows immediately from the definition of multiplica-
tion in E (B) , which gives (#® l)(#'(g) 1) = (xx') ® 1 for xe E and x' eE.
The existence and uniqueness of the B-linear mapping jf of E^) into F satisfying
the relation /(# ® 1) =f(x) for all x e E follow from II, § 5, no. 1, Proposi-
tion 1; here it all amounts to verifying that f(yy') = f(y)f(y') for y and y'
in E (B) ; as the elements of the form x (g&gt; 1 (with x e E) generate the B-module
E (B) , attention may be confined to the case where y = #&lt;g) 1, y' = #' ® 1
with xeE, x' eE; as yy' = (xx') (g) 1, the relation f(yy') = f(y)f(y') then
follows from/(;a') = f(x)f(x').

It can also be said that /W/ is a canonical bijection

(6) Hom A _ al(r .(E, P *(F)) -&gt; Hom B _ alg .(p*(E), F).

The ordered pair consisting of E (B) and &lt;{&gt; E is therefore a solution of the
universal mapping problem (Set Theory, IV, § 3, no. 1) where S is the species
of B-algebra structure and the a-mappings the A-homomorphisms from
E to a B-algebra.

Corollary. Let E, E' be two A-algebras; for every A-homomorphism of algebras
u: E -&gt; E', u 1 B is the uniqueB-homomorphism of algebras v: E ® A B -&gt; E' ® A B
rendering commutative the diagram

E -^-&gt; E® A B



E' -— &gt; E'0 A B

Oe'

Let C be a third commutative ring and ct:B -&gt; C a ring homomorphism;
it is immediate that the canonical G-homomorphism

«*(p*(E))-(«o P )*(E)

mapping (x® 1) ® 1 to x ® 1 for all xeE (II, §5, no. 1, Proposition 2)
is an algebra isomorphism.

6. INVERSE AND DIRECT LIMITS OF ALGEBRAS

Let I be a preordered set and (A i5 &lt;J&gt; (i ) an inverse system of commutative rings
with I as indexing set. Let (E i3j /y) be an inverse system of Aj-modules with I
as indexing set (II, § 6, no. 1) and suppose further that each E { has an A r
algebra structure and that, for i &lt; j, f {j is an Ay-homomorphism of algebras
(relative to &lt;j&gt; w ) (no. 5) . Let A = lim A { and E = lim E i} which has an A-

434



INVERSE AND DIRECT LIMITS OF ALGEBRAS § 1.6

module structure, the inverse limit of the structure of the A r modules Ej (II,
§ 6, no. 1); it is immediately verified that the law of composition on E, con-
sidered as the inverse limit of the E, considered as magmas under multiplication
(I, § 10, no. 1), with the A-module structure on E, defines on E an A-algebra
structure; (E^fy) is called an inverse system of A f -algebras and the A-algebra E is
called its inverse limit. If/,:E-&gt;E ( , ^jA-^Aj are the canonical mappings,
fi is an A-homomorphism of algebras (relative to &lt;j&gt; f ). If the E { are associative
(resp. commutative), so is E; if each E { admits a unit element e t andfufa) = e t
for i ^.j,e= (e t ) is a unit element of the algebra E.

Let (E|,/£) be another inverse system of Aj-algebras and for all i let
u i' Ei-&gt;E,' be an Ai-algebra homomorphism, these mappings forming an
inverse system; then u = lim u t is an A-algebra homomorphism.

Suppose now that all the A 4 are equal to the same commutative ring A
and the &lt;j&gt; y to Id A , so that E = lim E, is an A-algebra. Let F be an A-algebra
and, for all eel, let m^F-^Ej be an A-algebra homomorphism such that
(w,) is an inverse system of mappings; then u = lima, is a homomorphism
of the algebra F into the algebra E. Conversely, for every A-algebra homo-
morphism v:F -^ E, the family of v t =f t o v is an inverse system of A-algebra
homomorphisms such that v = lim v t . As moreover, writing^ = Hom(l p ,y^),
(Hom A _ alg .(F, Ej),^) is clearly an inverse system of sets, it is seen that the
above remarks can also be expressed by saying that the canonical mapping
v \-+ (fi o v) is a. bijection

/ P :Hom A _ ate .(F, lim E,) ~&gt; lim Hom A _ aI(r .(F, E,).
Moreover, for every A-algebra homomorphism w:F -&gt; F', the

u&gt;i = Hom(w, 1 E&lt; ) :Hom A _ alR .(F / , E,) -&gt; Hom A _ aIfr . (F, E,)
form an inverse system of mappings and the diagram

Hom A _ aIg .(F', lim E,) — ^-&gt; lim Hom A _ al(r .(F', E.)



Hom(!», 1 E )



limiFj



Hom^^X^KmEj) -^-&gt; Hm Hom AHllf . (F, E,)

is commutative.

Suppose now that I is right directed. Consider a direct system of commu-
tative rings (A,, &lt;j&gt;„) and a direct system (E u f it ) of A r modules, with I as
indexing set; suppose that each E, has an A r algebra structure and that, for
* &lt;j»fit is an Aj-homomorphism of algebras (relative to &lt;J&gt; yj ) (no. 5) .Let
A = limAj, E = limEjj E has an A-module structure, the direct limit of
the structures of the A r modules E t (II, § 6, no. 2) ; moreover, the law of

435



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

composition on E considered as the direct limit of the E i5 considered as magmas
under multiplication (I, § 10, no. 3), with the A-module structure on E,
defines an A-algebra structure on E; (E i3 / yj ) is called a direct system of A,-
algebras and the A-algebra E is called its direct limit. If/J:E, -&gt; E, (f^A, -&gt; A
are the canonical mappings, f { is an h^-homomorphism of algebras (relative to
&lt;{&gt; { ). If the E t are associative (resp. commutative), so is E; if each E t admits a
unit element e t and/ yi ( ( ? J ) = e t for i &lt; j, E admits a unit element e such that
fifa) = e for all i e I.

Let (E'i,fn) be another direct system of Aj-algebras and for all i let
t^Ej-^-E,' be an A r algebra homomorphism, these mappings forming a
direct system; then u — lim u t is an A-algebra homomorphism.

Suppose now that all the rings A, are equal to the same ring A and the &lt;j&gt; yi
to Id A , so that E = lim E, is an A-algebra. Let F be an A-algebra and for all
i let tt t :E t -&gt; F an A-algebra homomorphism such that (u t ) is a direct system
of mappings; then u = limwj is a homomorphism of the algebra E into the
algebra F. Conversely, for every A-algebra homomorphism z/:E-&gt;F, the
family of v t = v ©/, is a direct system of A-algebra homomorphisms suchthat
v = lim z/j. As moreover, writing J i} = Hom(/ w , 1 P ), (Hom A _ al g.(E i5 F),f if ) is
clearly an inverse system of sets, it is seen that the above remarks can also be
expressed by saying that the canonical mapping bh&gt;(» o/ ( ) is a bisection

4:Hom A _ alB .(lim E u F) -&gt; lim Hom A _ alK .(E„ F).
Further, for every A-algebra homomorphism w:F -&gt; F', the

w t = Hom(l Bj , w) :Hom A _ alg .( E i5 F) -&gt; Hom A _ alg .(E i} F')
form an inverse system of mappings and the diagram

Hom A _ a i (r .(Hni E„ F) — ^&gt; lim Hom A _ alg .(E i5 F)



Hom(lB. u&gt;)



lim wt



Hom A _ al(r .(hm E„ F') -^&gt; lim Hom A _ alg .(E„ F')

is commutative.

7. BASES OF AN ALGEBRA. MULTIPLICATION TABLE

By definition, a basis of an A-algebra E is a basis of E for its A-module struc-
ture. Let (flOtei be a basis of E; there exists a unique family (Y?/)(i,/, fc)6 ixixi
of elements of the ring A such that for every ordered pair (*,.;) e I x I, the
set of k e I such that y f „ ^ is finite and

(7) aPi = fc i yW

436



BASES OF AN ALGEBRA. MULTIPLICATION TABLE



§1-7



The y?/ are called the constants of structure of the algebra E with respect to the
basis (a t ) and relations (7) constitute the multiplication table of the algebra E
(relative to the basis (a t )).

Relations (7) can be imagined written down by setting out the right
hand sides of these relations in a square table







...


a i


...












•










a i






2 Y&lt;%




:











it being understood that the element appearing in the row of index i and
the column of index j is equal to the product a t aj.

Conversely, given an A-module E, a basis (a i ) (6l of E and a family (y^) of
elements of A such that for every ordered pair (i,j) e I x I the set of k e I
such that yf s # is finite, then there is on E one and only one A-algebra struc-
ture under which relations (7) hold, since the A-module E ® A E is free and
admits as basis (a t (g) a,) (i j)elxl (cf. II, § 3, no. 7, Corollary 2 to Proposition
7).

Let E be an A-algebra and (a J ) j6 i a generating system of the A-module E
(for example a basis). For E to be associative, it is necessary and sufficient that
the fl 4 satisfy the associativity relations

(8) («!«*)«* = &lt;h(*fik) for all i,j, k

The mapping (x,y, z) v-+ {xy)z — x(yz) is an A-trilinear mapping

E x E x E-&gt;E

and hence defines an A-linear mapping E &lt;g) A E &lt;g) A E-&gt;E; if the latter
mapping is zero for all the elements a t ® a t (g&gt; a k , which form a generating
system of the A-module E &lt;g) A E ® A E, it is identically zero.

Similarly, for E to be commutative, it is necessary and sufficient that the a t
satisfy the commutativity relations

(9) a^y = a f a t for all i,j.

The proof is analogous, this time considering the A-bilinear mapping
(*» y)*-+xy — yx. Finally, for an element e e E to be a unit element, it is
necessary and sufficient that the a t satisfy the relations

(10) a, == ea { = a t e for all i,



437



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

as is seen this time by considering the A-linear mappings x i-&gt; x — xe and

x i-&gt;- x — ex.

When (fli) ie i is a basis of E and (yf/) the corresponding family of con-
stants of structure, relations (8) are equivalent to the relations

2 T«Yrfc = -2 Y?rY?fc

for all i, j, k, s. Similarly relations (9) are equivalent to yfy = Y/i f° r a h
ij, k.

Let (a { ) i e t be a basis of the A-algebra E ; if p : A -&gt; B is a ring homomorphism,
(a t 1) is a basis of the B-algebra p*(E) = E &lt;g) A B (II, § 5, no. 1, Proposi-
tion 4). If (yfy) is the family of constants of structure relative to the basis (a t ),
the family (p(y^)) is the family of constants of structure of p*(E) relative to
the basis (a t ® 1).



§ 2. EXAMPLES OF ALGEBRAS

Throughout this paragraph, A denotes a commutative ring.

1. ENDOMORPHISM ALGEBRAS

Let B be an associative A-algebra with a unit element denoted by 1 and let
M be a right B-module. We know that the ring E = End B (M) also has a
module structure over the centre of B. Now the image of the homomorphism
A:an&gt;a.l of A into B is contained in the centre of B (§1, no. 1) ; hence h
gives E an A-module structure. Further, for a e A and/, g in E,

«(/°£) =f° M = («0 °S',

hence multiplication in E and the A-module structure on E define an associa-
tive A-algebra structure on E; the identity mapping of M is a unit element of
this algebra.

2. MATRIX ELEMENTS

Let B be a unital associative A-algebra and M n (B) the set of square matrice of
order n over B (II, § 10, no. 7). Then M n (B) has an A-module structure defined
by a . (b i} ) = (a£ w ) (a eA 5 i H eB, 1 &lt; i &lt; n, 1 &lt;j^n); this structure and
matrix multiplication define a unital associative A-algebra structure on M n (B).
The canonical bijection of M n (B) onto End B (B£) (II, § 10, no. 7) is an A-
algebra isomorphism.

438



QUADRATIC ALGEBRAS § 2.3

When B = A, the A-algebra M n (A) admits a canonical basis (E tJ ) consisting
of the matrix units (II, § 10, no. 3); the corresponding multiplication table is

(1) EijEhk = SifcE ifc .

n

The unit element /„ is equal to 2* E H .

3. QUADRATIC ALGEBRAS

Let a, p be two elements of A and (e l9 e 2 ) the canonical basis of A 2 . The
quadratic algebra of type (a, (3) over A is the A-module A 2 with the algebra
structure defined by the multiplication table (§ 1, no. 7)

(2) e\ = e lt e x e 2 = e 2 e x = e 2&gt; el = oc^ + $e 2 .

An A-algebra E isomorphic to a quadratic algebra is also called a quadratic
algebra. It amounts to the same to say that E admits a basis of two elements
one of which is the unit element.

It can be shown that every unital A-algebra which admits a basis of
two elements is a quadratic algebra (Exercise 1).

If a basis (e 1} e 2 ) of an A-algebra has multiplication table (2), it is called
a basis of type (a, (3). By an abuse of language, a quadratic algebra is said to
be of type (a, |3) when it has a basis of type (a, (3).

Proposition 1. A quadratic algebra E is associative and commutative.

The fact that E is commutative follows from the equation e x e 2 = e 2 e x in
(2) ; similarly, to verify associativity, it suffices to see that x(yz) = {xy)z when
x, y, z are each equal to e x or e 2 . Now, this relation is obvious if at least one
of the elements x, y, z is equal to e x ; it is also true for x = y = z = e 2 since E
is commutative; whence the proposition.

Let e denote the unit element of a quadratic algebra E and let (e, i) be a
basis of E of type (a, (3) ; every other basis of E containing e is therefore of the
form (e,j) with j = ye + 8i (II, §7, no. 2, Corollary to Proposition 3);
moreover, for (e,j) to be a basis of E, it is necessary and sufficient that 8 be
invertible in A; the condition is obviously sufficient; conversely, if i is the
canonical image of i in E/A&lt;?, f and j = $i must each form a basis of E/A&lt;?,
whence the necessity of the condition. Then

j 2 = (y 2 + &lt;x.8 2 )e + (2y8 + p8 2 )*' = (aS 2 - y 2 - $y8)e + (2y + $S)j;
thus it is seen that E is of type
(3) (a8 2 - y 2 - Py8, 2y + 08)

439



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

for all invertible S e A and all y e A. In particular, if E is of type (a, 2[3'), i
is also of type (a + (3' 2 , 0) as is seen by taking y = — fj' and 8=1.

Proposition 2. Let E be a quadratic A-algebra and e its unit element. For all ueE,
let T(u) be the trace of the endomorphism m u \x*-&gt;ux of the free A-module E (II,
§ 4, no. 3). Then the mapping s defined by s(u) = T(u) .e — u is an automorphism
of the algebra E and s 2 (u) — ufor all ueE.

Let (e, i) be a basis of E of type (a, (3) ; then T(e) = 2, when s(e) = e,
and T(i) = (3, whence s(i) = $e — i. Hence (e, s(i)) is a basis of E, whose
type is given by (3) with y = (3 and 8 = — 1, which again gives (a, (3); it
follows that s is an automorphism of the algebra E. As m sW = sm u s~ 1 i the
endomorphisms m u and m s(u) of the A-module E have the same trace (II,
§ 4, no. 3, Proposition 3), whence

s 2 (u) = T(m) .e — s(u) = T(u) .e — (T(u) .e — u) = u

for all u e E.

The automorphism s is called conjugation of the A-algebra E and s(u) the
conjugate of u.

If u = £&lt;? + f\i, with £, 7) in A, then s(u) = (£ + |3yj)&lt;! — tjz, whence

(4) T(u)e = u + s(u) = (2£ + (3t))*

(5) M ..y( M ) = {I 2 + p&amp;j - a?) 2 )* = N(«)«

where we have written N(w) = £ 2 + {3£iq — ay) 2 . The elements T(«) and N(«)
(or, when A and Ae are canonically identified, the elements T(u)e and N(u)e)
are called respectively the trace and norm of u.

When (3 = 0, the above formulae are simplified to

(6) s{le + yfl) = le- Tji, T(^ + ijt) = 2 5, N(^ + vji) = £ 2 - oof.

Clearly T is a linear form on E *and N is a quadratic form on E (IX, § 3,
no. 4)5,5. As E is commutative and associative, it follows from (5) that

(7) N(tto) = N(k))N(o).

For u to be invertible in E, it is necessary and sufficient that N(w) be invertible
in A. For, as N(e) = 1, the necessity of the condition follows from (7), writing
v — u~ x . Conversely, if N(u) is invertible in A, it follows from (5) that u is
invertible and that

(8) u- 1 = (Nfa))- 1 ^").

♦It can be proved that N(«) is the determinant (§ 8, no. 1) of the endomorphism
»*u (c£ § 9 n °« 3, Example 1).*

440



CAYLEY ALGEBRAS § 2.4

The following proposition gives the structure of quadratic algebras over a
commutative field :

Proposition 3. Let E be a quadratic A-algebra of type (a, (3).

(i) If A is afield and contains no element £ such that £ 2 = a + {*£, E is a {com-
mutative) field (cf. V, § 3).

(ii) If the ring A contains an element £ such that £ 2 = a + (3£ and (3 — 2£ is
invertible (resp. zero), E is isomorphic to A x A (resp. is of type (0, 0)).

We prove (i). Let £, tj be two elements of A and « = \e + tjz. If 73 ^
and we write 6 == — &amp;Q" 1 , then N(u) = y) 2 (8 2 — (36 — a) by (5), whence
N(w) # by virtue of the hypothesis on A; if yj = 0, then N(m) = £ 2 . In any
case, if u # 0, then N(«) =^ 0, hence N(k) is invertible in A and therefore u
is invertible in E.

We now prove (ii). The canonical basis (e x , e 2 ) of the algebra A x A is
of type (0, 1). We have seen (formula (3)) that E is of type

(oc8 2 - y 2 - Py&amp;, 2y + (38)

for all y e A and all 8 invertible in A. If p — 2£ is invertible, take
8 = ((3 - 2S) - 1 and y = -£(p - 2Q" 1 ; then 2y + (38 = 1 and

a $2 _ Y 2 _ p yS = §2( a _ £2 + j3Q = .

thus E is of type (0, 1) and hence isomorphic to A x A. If (3 — 2£ = 0, it
has already been remarked that E is of type (a + C 2 , 0) an d hence of type
(0, 0) since a + £ 2 = 2£ 2 - ft = 0.

A quadratic A-algebra of type (0, 0) is also called an algebra of dual numbers
over A.

4. CAYLEY ALGEBRAS

Definition 1. A Cayley algebra over A is an ordered pair (E, s), where E is an
algebra over A with a unit element e and s is an antiautomorphism of E such that

u + s(u)eAe and u.s(u)eAe

for all «gE.

s is called the conjugation of the Cayley algebra (E, s) and s(u) the conjugate
of u. The condition u + s{u) e Ae implies that u and s(u) are permutable. We
write

(9) T(«) = u + s(u)

(10) N(tt) = u.s{u) = s(u).u

and these elements of the subalgebra Ae are called respectively the Cayley
trace and norm of «.

441



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

The ordered pair consisting of a quadratic algebra E and its conjugation s
(which is an antiautomorphism since E is commutative) (no. 3) is a Cayley
algebra.

Let (E, s) be a Cayley algebra; as s(e) = e, s(u + s(u)) = u + s(u), in
other words s(u) + s 2 (u) = u + s(u) or also

(11) s 2 (u)=u

so that s 2 is the identity mapping of E. It follows that

(12) T(j(«)) = T(«), N(*(«)) = N(«).
Finally, the relation (u — u)(u — s(u)) = gives

(13) u 2 -T(ii).« + N(u) =0
for all ue£.

Proposition 4. Let E be an A-algebra and s and s' antiautomorphisms of E such
that (E, s) and (E, s') are Cayley algebras. If E admits a basis containing the unit
element e, then s' = s.

Clearly s'(u) = s(u) = u for all u e Ae. If T, N (resp. T", N') are the trace
and norm functions for (E, s) (resp. (E, s')), it follows from (13) that

(T(«) - T(u)).u - (N(«) - N») = 0.

Let B be a basis of E containing e and u an element of B distinct from e; then
T(m) — T'(m) = 0, whence s(u) = s'(u). As s and s' coincide on B, they are
equal.

In what follows, we shall write u = .t(m), so that

(u + u = T(u), uu = uu = N(m), u = u

(14) J — —

^u + » = u + v, cat — a.u, uv = v.u

for u, v in E, a e A; moreover

(15) T(tf) = 2*, N(*) = *.
From the formula

T(uv) = uv + uv = uv + v .u = uv + (T(v) — v)(T(u) — u),
we deduce that

(16) uv + vu = T(t*)» + T(o)« + (T(i») - T(«)T(o))
whence, exchanging u and y,

(17) T(w) = T(iw).

442



CONSTRUCTION OF CAYLEY ALGEBRAS. QUATERNIONS § 2.5

On the other hand, N(a + v) = (u + v){u + v) = N(«) + N(o) + TV),
whence

(18) T{vu) = T{uv) = N(k + v) - N(u) - N(o).
Now, (16) applied with u replaced by u gives

T(uv) = T(ti)T(») + wo + oS - T(«)o - T(»)g = T(m)T(o) - mo - o.fi;
whence

(19) T(vu) = T{uv) = N(« + v) - N(u) - N(z&gt;) = T(«)T(o) - T(ao).
Finally, clearly for all a g A,

(20) N(a«) =a 2 N(a);

in particular N(2«) = 4N(«), so that formula (19) gives

(21) (T(«)) 2 - T(m 2 ) = 2N(«).

Clearly T is a linear form on the (Ae) -module E. As («, v) i-&gt; T(vu) is a
bilinear form on this module, *it follows from (18) and (20) that N is a
quadratic form (cf. IX, § 3, no. 4).*

5. CONSTRUCTION OF CAYLEY ALGEBRAS. QUATERNIONS

Let (E, s) be a Cayley algebra over A, for which we shall use the notation of
no. 4, and let y e A. Let F be the algebra over A whose underlying module
is E x E and whose multiplication is defined by

(22) (*, y) (*', y') = (**' + yy'y, yx' + y'x) ;

clearly (e, 0) is unit element of F and E x {0} is a subalgebra of F isomorphic
to E; we shall identify it with E in what follows, so that xe E is identified
with (#, 0) and in particular e is identified with the unit element of F.
Let / be the permutation of F defined by

(23) t((x,y)) = (*, -y) (*eE,y£E).

Proposition 5. (i) The ordered pair (F, i) is a Cayley algebra over A.

(ii) Let j = (0, e), so that (x,y) = xe + yj for x e E, y e E. The Cayley trace
and norm T F and N P ofF are given by the formulae

(24) T F {xe + yj) = T(*), N F (*« + yj) = N(x) - T N(y).

(iii) For F to be associative, it is necessary and sufficient that E be associative and
commutative.

443



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

For (*,y)eF,

(25) (x,y) + t{{x,y)) = (* + x, 0) = T{x)e

(26) (x,y)t((x,y)) = {x,y){x, -y) = (xx - yyy,yx - yx)

= (N(*) - Y N(y), 0) = (N(*) - Y N(y))«.

To prove both (i) and (ii), it therefore suffices to show that t is an antiauto-
morphism of F. Clearly t is an A-linear bijection. On the other hand,

t((x,y).(x',y')) = *((**' + yy'y,yx' + y'x)) = (*'* + yyy', -yx-y'x)
= (*', -y')(*, -y) = H(x',y'))t((x,y))

and hence £ is an antiautomorphism.

It remains to prove (iii). As E is identified with a subalgebra of F, E may
be assumed to be associative. Let u = (x,y), u' = (*',y')&gt; u " — ( x "&gt;y") De
elements of F. Then



(27) 1



( (uu')u' = ((xx' + yy'y)x" + yy n (yx' + y'x),

(yx' + y'x)x" + y"(xx' + yy'y))

u(u'u") = (x(x'x" + yy"y') + ( Y (*y + x'y")y,

y(x"x' + vy'y") + (y'x? + y"x')x).

Examining these formulae shows that the commutativity of E implies the
associativity of F. Conversely, if F is associative, formulae (27) applied with
y = y' = 0, x" = and y" = e give (0, x'x) ~ (0, xx'), that is x'x = xx' for
all x, x' in E; thus E is then commutative.

Note also that, in the above notation, for x, y in E,

(28) yj=jy, x(yj) = (yx)j, (xj)y = (xy)j, (xj)(yj)=yxe

(29) j 2 = e.

The Cayley algebra (F, t) is called the Cayley extension of (E, s) defined by y.

Examples. (1) If we take E = A (and hence s — 1 A ), the algebra F is a
quadratic A-algebra with basis (e,j) where J 2 = ye.

(2) Take E to be a quadratic algebra of type (a, (J), so that the underlying
module of E is A 2 , with multiplication table (2) (no. 3) for the canonical basis.
Take s to be conjugation of E (no. 3, Proposition 2). Then, for all y £ A, the
Cayley extension F of (E, s) defined by y is called the quaternion algebra of type
(a, p, y), which is associative by no. 3, Proposition 1 and Proposition 5 above;
its underlying module is A 4 and, if (e, i,j, k) denotes the canonical basis of A 4 ,
the corresponding multiplication table is given by

{i 2 = cue + $i, ij = k, ik = cnj + $k,

ji = (3/ - k, j 2 = ye, jk = $ye - yi,
ki = —ctj, kj = yi, k 2 = —aye.

444



CONSTRUCTION OF CAYLEY ALGEBRAS. QUATERNIONS § 2.5

Further, for u = pe + \i + r^j + v\k (with p, 5, 7), £ in A), we have (writing
u instead of t (w) and identifying A with Ae) :

f u = (p + $Z)e - li -y)j-Vc

(31) \ T,(«) = 2p + ^

[ N F (w) = p 2 + frg - a£ 2 - Y (t3 2 + ftC - o£ 2 ).

Formulae (30) follow from (28) and (29) and formulae (31) from (23) and
(24), taking account of the formulae for the quadratic algebra E.
Then, for u, v in F,

(32) N F (i») = N F (a)N F (o)

for N F («y) = uv.uv = uv(v.u) = tt(»y)a = (uu)(vv) by virtue of the associa-
tivity and the fact that N f (m) belongs to the centre of F.

An A-algebra isomorphic to a quaternion algebra is also called a quater-
nion algebra; if a basis of such an algebra has multiplication table (30), it is
called a basis of type (a, (3, y). By an abuse of language, a quaternion algebra
is said to be of type (a, [3, y) when it has a basis of type (a, (3, y).

When (3 = 0, formulae (30) and (31) simplify to





r p = &lt;x&lt;?,




y = K


ik = a/,


(33)


s j* = -a,




j 2 = Y«&gt;


jk = -yt,




[^ fo' = — ou,




*/ = ih


A; 2 = — ay*j


and












f " =


pe


- li - t\j


-a


(34)


^ T F («) =


2p








I N F («) =


P 2


— a£ 2 — y?j 2 + ay£ 2 .



Then (a, (3, y) is replaced throughout by (a, y) in the above expressions.
It is immediate that the quaternion algebras of types (a, y) and (y, a) are
isomorphic.

Note that formulae (32) show that F is not commutative when — 1^1
in A.

♦Taking A to be the field R of real numbers and a = y = ~1, (3 = 0,
the corresponding algebra F is called the algebra of Hamiltonian quaternions
and is denoted by H. If u = pe + £z 4- t\j + XJi (p, £, yj, £ in R) is an element
#0 in H, the formula uu = uu = p 2 + Z? + 7) 2 + K, 2 (cf. (34)) shows that
N(«) # in R, so that u admits an inverse u~ x = N(m) ~ x u in H and that H
is therefore a non-commutative field.

(3) If E is taken to be a quaternion algebra (cf. Example 2), the Cayley
extension of E defined by an element 8 6 A is in general non-associative

445



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(Proposition 5) ; it is called an octonion algebra over A (cf. Appendix, no. 3).

6. ALGEBRA OF A MAGMA, A MONOID, A GROUP

Recall that a magma is a set with a law of composition (I, § 1, no. 1). Let S be a
magma written multiplicatively and let E = A (S) be the A-module of formal
linear combinations of elements of S (II, § 1, no. 1 1) ; we know that a canonical
mapping s &gt;-*- e s is denned of S into A (S) such that the family (e s ) seS is a basis
(called canonical) of A (S) , every element of A (S) being then written uniquely in

the form 2^ cc/ s , where (a s ) is a family of elements of A of finite support. Then

an A-algebra structure is defined on E by taking as multiplication table of the
canonical basis

(35) e s e t = e st .

The algebra E thus defined is called the algebra of the magma S over A. If

x = 2* % s e s and y = 2i, y)/ s are two elements of E, then



xy = Z I 2, &amp;*)„)&lt;

seS \tu=s /



When S is a monoid (resp. group), E is called the algebra of the monoid
(resp. group) S over A; it is then an associative algebra (§ 1, no. 7); similarly,
when S is a commutative monoid, its algebra is associative and commutative.
Finally if the magma S admits an identity element u, e u is unit element
of the algebra E; as the element e u is free, A is then identified with the sub-
algebra Ae u of E.

When A j£ {0}, S is sometimes identified with its image under the
injection s*-+e s , so that an element of E is written as 2* a s $; but this

identification is not possible (without causing confusion) when S is written
additively. Then e s is also often written instead of e s .

Let B be another commutative ring and p:A-&gt;B a ring homomorphism;
consider the algebras E = A (S) and E' = B (S) of the same magma S over A
and B and let (e s ) seS and (e' s ) se s be their respective canonical bases. The
algebra B (S) is canonically identified, under the A-linear mapping j such that
j{e s ® 1) = e' s for all seS, with the algebra A (S) &lt;g) A B obtained from A (S)
by extending the ring of scalars to B (II, § 1, no. 11, Corollary 3 to Proposi-
tion 17).

Proposition 6. Let S be a magma, F an A-algebra and f a homomorphism of
446



&gt;



ALGEBRA OF A MAGMA, A MONOID, A GROUP § 2.6

S into F with only its multiplicative structure. Then there exists one and only one A-
algebra homomorphism/ :A (S) -» F rendering commutative the diagram

(36)

A&lt;s&gt; — * F
7

(where the vertical arrow on the left is the canonical mapping s&lt;-&gt;e s ).

Let /:A (S) -»F be the unique A-module homomorphism such that
f(e s ) = f(s) (II, § 1, no. 1 1, Corollary 3 to Proposition 1 7) ; it suffices to verify
that J is an algebra homomorphism and for this it suffices to prove that
f( e s e t) —f( e s)f{ e t)&gt; which follows immediately from the definition and the
hypothesis/^) = f(s)f(t).

Proposition 6 expresses the fact that the ordered pair consisting of
A (S) and the canonical mapping s i-&gt; e s is a solution of the universal mapping
problem (Set Theory, IV, § 3, no. I) where S is the species of A-algebra
structure and the a-mappings the homomorphisms of S into an A-algebra
with only its multiplicative law.

Corollary. Let S, S' be two magmas and g:S -&gt; S' a homomorphism. Then there
exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism «:A (S) — &gt; A (S ' } rendering commuta-
tive the diagram

S — e —&gt; S'



A&lt; s &gt; — &gt; A (S '&gt;

u

(where the vertical arrows are the canonical mappings).

It suffices to apply Proposition 6 taking f to be the composite mapping
S-4S'-&gt;A (S '&gt;.

In particular, if T is a stable subset of the magma S (I, § 1, no. 4), the set of

elements 2* a/ s of A (S) is a subalgebra of A (S) canonically isomorphic to the
algebra A (T) and sometimes identified with the latter.

Example. Let V be an A-module and S a monoid which operates on V on the
left; this means (I, § 5, no. 1) that there is given a mapping (s, x) h&gt; s. x of S
into V such that s. (x + y) = s.x + s.y, s. (cue) — a.(s.x) and s. (t.x) = (st) .x
for s, t in S, x, y in V and a £ A and, denoting by e the identity element of S,

447



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

e.x = x for xe V. Writing f(s) (x) = s.x,fis a homomorphism of S into the
algebra End A (V) (with only its multiplicative law), mapping the identity
element e to the unit element l v . Applying Proposition 6, an A-algebra homo-
morphism /:A (S) -&gt;End A (V) is obtained, which gives the underlying group
of V a left module structure over A (S) .

This allows us to reduce the study of commutative groups with operators
to that of modules. For let M be a commutative group with operators
written additively, all of whose external laws are written multiplicatively.
Let CI be the sum set (Set Theory, II, § 4, no. 8) of the domains of
operators of the various external laws on M, each of these domains being
canonically identified with a subset of CI. Let Mo(Q) be the free monoid
(I § 7, no. 2) constructed on CI; a law of action

(s, X) H&gt; S . X

is defined on M with Mo(Q) as domain of operators, by induction on the
length of the word s in Mo(O) ; if s is of length 0, it is the empty word e
and we write e.x = x for all x e M. If* is of length n &gt; 1, it can be written
uniquely as s = tu, where u is of length n — 1 and t of length 1, so that
te CI; we then write s.x = t.(u.x). For any two words s, s' in Mo(n),
the relation s.(s' .x) = (ss') .x is verified by induction on the length of s.

Then applying the method described above, a left Z (Mo&lt;nw -module
structure is obtained on M and it is verified without difficulty that the
usual notions in the theory of groups with operators (stable subgroups,
homomorphisms) are the same for commutative groups with operators
and the modules thus associated with them.

7. FREE ALGEBRAS

Definition 2. Let 1 be a set; let M(I) (resp. Mo(I), resp. N (I) ) denote the free
magma (resp. free monoid, resp. free commutative monoid) derived from I. The algebra
ofM.(T) (resp. Mo(I), resp. N®) over A is called the free algebra (resp. free associa-
tive algebra, resp. free commutative associative algebra (or, by an abuse of language,
free commutative algebra)) of the set I over the ring A.

We shall denote the free algebra (resp. free associative algebra, resp. free
commutative algebra) of I over A by Lib A (I) (resp. Libas A (I) , resp. Libasc A (I) ) .
By composing the canonical mapping of I into M(I) (resp. Mo (I), resp.
N (I) ) with the canonical mapping of M(I) (resp. Mo(I), resp. N (I) ) into Lib A (I)
(resp. Libas A (I), resp. Libasc A (I)), a canonical mapping is obtained of I
intoLib A (I) (resp. Libas A (I), resp. Libasc A (I)), which is injective if A ^ {0}.
We shall denote the image of an element eel under this canonical mapping
by X { and we shall say that X, is the indeterminate of index i of Lib A (I) (resp.
Libas A (I), resp. Libasc A (I)).

As Mo(I) and N (I) each have an identity element, Libas A (I) and Libasc A (I)

448



FREE ALGEBRAS § 2.7

are unital associative algebras and further Libasc A (I) is commutative. If e
is the unit element of Libas A (I) (resp. Libasc A (I)), the mapping a.\-&gt;ae is
an isomorphism of A onto a subring of the centre of Libas A (I) (resp. Libasc A (I)),
which is identified with A (no. 1).

Proposition 7. Let I be a set and F an algebra (resp. unital associative algebra,
resp. unital commutative associative algebra) over A. For every mapping /": I — &gt; F,
there exists one and only one homomorphism (resp. unital homomorphism) f of
Lib A (I) (resp. Libas A (I), resp. Libasc A (I)) into F such thatfi^) =f{i) for all
i el.

Let F m be the magma (resp. monoid) obtained by giving the set F its multi-
plicative law of composition. There is one and only one homomorphism
(resp. unital homomorphism) g of M(I) (resp. Mo (I), resp. N (I) ) into F m
such that g(i) = f(i) for all iel (I, §7, nos. 1, 2 and 7); Proposition 7
then follows from no. 6, Proposition 6.

Remarks. (1) We shall later define an isomorphism of Libas A (I) onto the
tensor algebra of the free module A (I) (§ 5, no. 5) and also an isomorphism of
Libasc A (I) onto the symmetric algebra of A (I) (§ 6, no. 6).

(2) Let p be a unital homomorphism of A into a commutative ring B.
As has been seen (§ 2, no. 6), an isomorphism a is derived from p of Lib B (I)
(resp. Libas B (I), resp. Libasc B (I)) onto the algebra (Lib A (I)) (B) (resp.
(Libas A (I)) (B) , resp. (Libasc A (I)) (B) ) obtained by extending the scalars to B
by means of p; if Xf, Xf are the ^determinates of index i corresponding
respectively to A and B, then a(Xf) = Xf &lt;g&gt; 1.

(3) Let J be a subset of I; we know that M(J) is identified with a stable
subset of the magma M(I) and hence (no. 6) Lib A (J) is canonically identi-
fied with a subalgebra of Lib A (I), generated by the X { such that z'ej; it
is said that only the indeterminates of indices belonging to J occur in an
element of Lib A (J). The definition given in no. 6 of the algebra of a magma
shows that Lib A (I) is the union of the directed family of subalgebras Lib A (J)
when J runs through the set of finite subsets of I. There are analogous results for
Libas A (I) and Libasc A (I).

(4) With element s of M(I) (resp. Mo (I), resp. N (I) ) is associated its length
l(s), which is an integer ^1 (resp. ^0) such that l(ss') = l(s) + l(s') (I,
§7, nos. 1, 2 and 7). If e s is the element of Lib A (I) (resp. Libas A (I), resp.
Libasc A (I)) corresponding to s, the total degree (or simply the degree of an

element x = Z, a s &lt;? s ^ of Lib A (I) (resp. Libas A (A), resp. Libasc A (I)) is the

greatest of the numbers l(s) when s runs through the (non-empty by hypo-
thesis) set of elements such that a s ^ 0. For example, if i, j, k are three dis-
tinct elements of I, the element (X i (X i X k ))X i — (XjX y )(X fc X{) is an element
^0 of total degree 4 in Lib A (I).

449



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

8. DEFINITION OF AN ALGEBRA BY GENERATORS AND RELATIONS

Let F be an algebra over A and (xi) lel a family of elements of F. By no. 7,
Proposition 7, there exists a unique homomorphism/: Lib A (I) -&gt; F such that
/(Xj) = x t for all i e I. For/ to be surjective, it is necessary and sufficient that
(*i)tei De a generating system of F.

If UeLib A (I),/(U) is called the element ofF derived from U by substituting
the elements x t for the indeterminates Xf , or also the value of U for the values x t
of the indeterminates X 4 ; it is usually denoted by U^tfjjgj); in particular
U((Xi) ieI ) = U. If X is a homomorphism of F into an algebra F' over A,
then

A(U((^),el)) = U((X(*0)l.l).

Consider in particular the case where F = Lib A (J), where J is another set;
for every family (Hj) leI of elements of Lib A (J) and every family (yj)j eJ of
elements of an A-algebra F',

(37) u((H,) fel ))((y;)i.j) = ukiw,),^)),.,).

In the above notation, every element U of Lib A (I) such that U((^) leI ) = 0,
or also such thatjf(U) = 0, is called a relator of the family (Xi) iel in F. The
two-sided ideal Ker(/) consisting of these elements is called the ideal of relators
of (*,).

Let (Ry)y 6 j De a family of elements of Lib A (I). {(x t ) tel , (R/)y eJ ) is called
a presentation of the algebra F if (*i) ieI is a generating system of F and the two-
sided ideal of Lib A (I) generated by the R^ is equal to the ideal of relators of
the family (# ( ) (sl ; the x t are called the generators and the R, the relators of the
presentation.

Consider now any set I and a family (R/)y 6 j of elements of Lib A (I). The
quotient algebra E of Lib A (I) by the two-sided ideal generated by the family
(R y ) is called the universal algebra defined by the generating system I related by the
family of relators (Ry)y s j- Clearly, if X 4 denotes the image of X t in E,

(( X i)iel&gt; (Ry)iej)

is a presentation of E. Moreover, if (# t ) ieI is a family of elements of an algebra
F and Ry((^) JeI ) = for allj'ej, there exists a unique homomorphism
g:E -&gt; F such thatg(X { ) = x t for all i e I; for ((x t ) iel , (Ry)y e j) to be a presen-
tation of F, it is necessary and sufficient that g be bijective.

These remarks justify the following abuse of language: instead of saying
"((*i)iei&gt; (Ry)/ej) is a presentation of F", it is also said that "F is the algebra
generated by the generators x x subject to the relations Ry((#i)i 6l ) = 0".
When the R, are of the form P y — Q,,, it is also said that "F is the algebra
generated by the *, subject to the relations P y ((*i)) = Qj((xt))".

Let H be a set; we shall say that an element S of Lib A (H) is a universal

450



DEFINITION OF AN ALGEBRA BY GENERATORS AND RELATIONS § 2.8

relator for an A-algebra F is S((* fc ) fceH ) = for every family (x h ) hea of elements
of F with H as indexing set.

Examples. (1) Take H = {1, 2, 3}; the algebras which admit

(X 1 X 2 )X 3 — X 1 (X 2 X 3 )

as universal relator are the associative algebras. The algebras which admit
XjXa — XgXj as universal relator are the commutative algebras. *The
algebras which admit the universal relators XiXj and

(X 1 X 2 )X 3 + (X 2 X 3 )X 1 + (x 3 xox 2

as universal relator are the Lie algebras. *

Let I be a set; let a family (S k ) keK of elements of Lib A (H) be given and
consider the set T of elements of Lib A (I) of the form S fc ((U A )) ft6H ), where k
runs through K and, for each k, (U A ) AeH runs through the set of families of
elements of Lib A (I) with H as indexing set; consider a family (Ry) /6J with T
as set of elements. Then let F be the universal algebra denned by the generat-
ing system I related by the family (R y ) yeJ and let a:Lib A (I) -»F be the
canonical homomorphism, so that Ker(w) is generated by the elements
S*((U fc ) A6H ) for all keK and all families (U ft ) fc6H of elements of Lib A (I);
clearly each of the S &amp; (k e K) is a universal relator for F. Now let F' be an
algebra admitting a generating system fo) i6I , for which each of the S fc is a
universal relator, and let u':Lib A (I) -&gt;F' be the homomorphism such that
w'(Xi) = x t for all iel; clearly Ker(«) c Ker(w') and hence «' can be writ-
ten uniquely in the form u' = h ° u, where h:F -&gt; F' is a homomorphism such
that A(Xj) = x t for all i e I. For this reason F is called the universal algebra
defined by the generating system I, corresponding to the family of universal relators
(Sfc) fc6 K- By an abuse of language, F is sometimes called the universal algebra
generated by I and subject to the identities S fc ((a fc )) = for every family
(« h ) heH of elements of F.

Example 2. Let L' be the universal algebra generated by I and subject to
the identities (uv)w - u{vw) = for every family of three elements of L'
and let L" be the algebra obtained by adjoining a unit element to L'; then
there exists a unique unital isomorphism g of L" onto Libas A (I) such that
g(Xj) = X t for all i e I. For clearly L" is associative and the existence of the
homomorphism g follows from the definition of L' and the remarks preceding
it; but then clearly L" satisfies the universal property (no. 7, Proposition 7)
which characterizes Libas A (I), whence the conclusion.

Considerations analogous to the above can be applied to associative alge-
bras (resp. commutative associative algebras), taking account of the follow-
ing remarks. When the context gives sufficient indication that the algebras

451



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

considered are unital algebras, by an abuse of language, a family of elements
(*i)iei of an algebra F, such that the subalgebra generated by the x t (*el)
and the unit element is equal to F, is often called a generating system of F. Then
let F be a unital associative algebra over A and let (*,) ieI be a family of
elements of F; by virtue of no. 7, Proposition 7, there exists a unique unital
homomorphism /:Libas A (I) -&gt; F such that f(X t ) = x t for all zel; if
U eLibas A (I),/(U) is also called the element ofF derived from U by substituting
the elements x t for the indeterminates X { and it is also denoted by U((#j) l6l ).
Then the notions of relator, presentation and universal relator go over immediately
to associative algebras; it suffices simply to replace Lib A (I) throughout by
Libas A (I). The universal unital associative algebra defined by the generating system
I related by the family of relators (R y )y 6j is the quotient algebra of Libas A (I) by
the two-sided ideal generated by the family (R,). The universal unital associa-
tive algebra generated by the generating system I, corresponding to a family
of universal relators is defined similarly. We leave to the reader the task of
stating the analogous definitions relative to commutative associative algebras
with Libasc A (I) substituted for Libas A (I).

Example 3. Let L' be the universal unital associative algebra generated by
I and subject to the identities uv - vu = for every family of two elements
of L\ It is seen, as in Example 2, that L' is canonically isomorphic to

Libasc A (I).

9. POLYNOMIAL ALGEBRAS

Let B be a unital commutative associative A-algebra and let (*j) |6 i be a family
of elements of B; the subalgebra of B generated by the *, (» e I) and the unit
element is denoted by A[(* t ) ieI ] B or simply A^iei] when no confusion can
arise. For every set I, the algebra Libasc A (I) is therefore equal to A[(X J ) i6l ]
(also denoted by A[XJ fe i); the latter notation, which has the advantage of
indicating the notation chosen to denote the indeterminates, is the one we
shall generally use in the rest of this Treatise. The elements of A[(X J )j e i]
are called polynomials in the indeterminates X, (t e I) with coefficients in A; it is a
convention that, when it is said "let A[(X,) |6 J be a polynomial algebra",
the X t are always understood to be the indeterminates. For every subset J
of I, the use of the above notation amounts to identifying Libasc A (J) with
the algebra of Libasc A (I) generated by the X ( of index * e J and the unit
element (cf. no. 7, Remark (3)). For I = {1, 2, ... , »}, we write A[X 1? X 2 , . . . ,
X„] instead of A[(X { ) leI ].

If I and I' are two equipotent sets, the algebras Libasc A (I) and Libasc A (F)
are isomorphic. A[X] is often used to denote the polynomial algebra corres-
ponding to an unspecified indexing set with a single element, X denoting the
unique indeterminate; similarly, A[X,Y], A[X, Y, Z], . . . are used to de-
note the polynomial algebras corresponding to unspecified indexing sets with

452



POLYNOMIAL ALGEBRAS § 2.9

2, 3, . . . elements. Note that, by virtue of the conventions made above, A[X]
and A[Y] are for example (distinct) subalgebras of A[X, Y, Z] if A ^ {0}.
The elements

X v = E[ X? w ,

iel

where v runs through N (I) form a basis of the polynomial algebra A[(X,) J6I ].
These elements are called monomials in the indeterminates Xt and the number

|v| = zL,v{i) is called the degree (or total degree) of the monomial X v . The

unique monomial of degree is the unit element of A[(X 1 ) (eI ]; it is often
identified with the unit element 1 of A. Every polynomial u of A[(X,) ieI ]
can be written uniquely as

u = 2 a v X v

with (XveA; the elements ocy, zero except for a finite number of indices
v eN (I) , are called the coefficients of u; the elements &lt;XvX v are called the terms
of u (the element a v X v often being called the "term in X v ") ; in particular
the term &lt;x X° (identified with oc e A) is called the constant term of u. If J is
a subset of I, u belongs to A[(X,) leJ ] if and only if oCy = for v ^N (J) . It
follows that A[(X,) ieI ] is the union of the subalgebras A[(X &lt; ) leJ ], where J
runs through the set of finite subsets of I. If &lt;x v = for |v| &gt; n, u is said to be
a. polynomial of degree &lt;«. When a v = 0, (by an abuse of language) u is said to
contain no term in X v ; in particular, when a = 0, u is said to be a polynomial
with no constant term.

For every non-zero polynomial u = 2L, a v X v , the degree (or total degree) of u
is the greatest of the integers |v| of the multiindices v such that ocy ^ 0.

Let F be a unital associative A-algebra and let (#i) i6l be a family of ele-
ments of F, which are pairwise permutable. The subalgebra F' of F generated
by the x t and the unit element is commutative (§ 1, no. 7), which allows us to
define substituting the x t for the X, in the polynomial u e A[(X i ) (gI ] (although
F is not necessarily commutative): «((#{) ie i) is an element of F' and there-
fore of F and h: u-&gt;u((x t ) iel ) is a homomorphism of A[(X i ) JeI ] into F.
The elements of the kernel of A are the relators of the family (x 4 ) in A[(X t ) i6l ],
also called polynomial relators (with coefficients in A) between the x x . The image
of the homomorphism h is the subalgebra F', also denoted by A[(#,) leI ] (even
when F is not commutative) ; if a is the ideal of polynomial relators between
the #{, then there is an exact sequence of A-modules

— &gt; a — * A[(X i ) i6l ] -±&gt; A[( Xl ) iel ] — ^ 0.

Proposition 8. Let A[(X i ) leI ] be a polynomial algebra, J a subset of I and K the
complement of J in I. Writing A' = A[(X y ) yeJ ] and denoting by X£ (A;eK) the

453



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

indeterminates in the polynomial algebra Libasc A ,(K) = A'[(X£) fcsK ], there exists
a unique ring isomorphism of A'[(X.' k ) keK \ onto A[(Xj) ieI ] which coincides with the
identity on A' and maps X£ to X k for all k e K.

Clearly A[(X 4 ) i£l ] is an A'-algebra generated by the X fc for k e K. On the
other hand, as a polynomial relator between the X fc (k e K) with coefficients

in A' can be written uniquely as 2* A v ((X y )y eJ )X v where v runs through a finite

subset of N (K) and where the h v are elements of A[(X y ) yeJ ], the hy, must be
polynomial relators between the Xy with coefficients in A and hence are all
zero, which proves the proposition.

The isomorphism described in Proposition 8 is often used to identify the
elements of A[(X i ) ieI ] with polynomials with coefficients in A' = A[(X y ) ieJ ].
If u is an element #0 of A[(X,) ieI ], its total degree considered as an element
of A'[(X fc ) fceK ] is also called its degree with respect to the X t of index i e K.

Remark. Let I and J be two sets and (Pj) je j a family of elements of Z[(X i ) ieI ] ;
if Q, is an element of Z[(X y ) /SJ ] such that Q,((P y ), 6j ) = 0, then, for every
family (b t ) lel of pairwise permutable elements of a ring B,

Q,((P;((*i)iel)),ej) = 0.

The relations which hold of the form Q,((P y ) i6j ) = are sometimes called
polynomial identities. For example

(X x + X 2 ) 2 - X? - X2 - 2X a X 2 =
with

Q=Y?-Y 2 , P^Xi + X,, P 2 = X* + Xjj + 2X X X 2

x; - xs - (Xi - x 2 )(x;- 1 + xr 2 x a + • • • + xr x ) = o

with

Q=Y 1 -Y 2 Y 35 Pj-XJ-XS, P 2 = X 1 -X 2 ,

p 3 = xr 1 + xr 2 Xa + . . . + xr 1

are polynomial identities.

10. TOTAL ALGEBRA OF A MONOID

The algebra of a monoid S over A is (as an A-module) the submodule of the
product A s consisting of the families (a s ) seS of finite support; the multiplica-
tion in this algebra is defined by the relations (&lt;x s )((3 s ) = (y s ), where, for all
s eS,

(38) y s = 2 s «$ u

454



FORMAL POWER SERIES OVER A COMMUTATIVE RING § 2.1 1

(cf. no. 6, formula (35)). The sum on the right hand side of (38) is mean-
ingful because (&lt;x s ) and ((3 S ) are families of finite support and so therefore
is the double family (&lt;x t p u ) (tfU)6SxS . But the right hand side of (38) is also
meaningful for arbitrary elements (&lt;x s ), $ s ) of A s when the monoid S satisfies
the following condition:

(D) For all seS, there exists only a finite number of ordered pairs (t, u) in S x S
such that tu — s.

Suppose then that S satisfies condition (D) ; a multiplication law can then
be defined on the product A-module A s by formula (38). It is immediate that
the multiplication thus defined on A s is A-bilinear; also it is associative, since,
for a, p, y in A s ,

^ «u(Vfu&gt; = ^A\ ** Xufivhw) = ^&lt; ( a u( ^ Pt&gt;Yu&gt;))-
uvw = t utUiU/ rw = t\\uv = r I I «s = t \ \vw = s //

This multiplication and the A-module structure on A s therefore define on
A s a unital associative algebra structure over A; we shall say that the set A s , with
this structure, is the total algebra of the monoid S over A.

It is immediate that the algebra A (S) of the monoid S over A (also called the
restricted algebra of S when necessary to avoid confusion) is a subalgebra of the
total algebra of S over A (and is identical with the latter when S is finite).
By an abuse of language, every element (£ s ) se s of the total algebra of S over A is

also denoted by the same notation 2* E s £ s (or even 2., % s .s) as the elements of

' seS \ seS /

the restricted algebra of S; of course the summation symbol appearing in this
notation corresponds to no algebraic operation because it is taken over an
infinity of terms #0 in general. With this notation, multiplication in the total
algebra of S is also given by formula (35) of no. 6.

If S is commutative, so is its total algebra A s . If T is a submonoid of S, the
total algebra A T of the monoid is canonically identified with a subalgebra of
the total algebra of S. If p : A -&gt; B is a ring homomorphism, the canonical
extension p s : A s -» B s is an A-homomorphism of the total algebra of S
over A into the total algebra of S over B, which extends the canonical homo-
morphism A (S) -&gt; B (S) .

11. FORMAL POWER SERIES OVER A COMMUTATIVE RING

For every set I, the additive monoid N (I) satisfies condition (D) of no. 10;
for, if s = (tti)iei with n t = except for the indices i in a finite subset H
of I, the relation s = t + u with t = (pi) ie i and u = (ft) ( ei is equivalent to
Pi + a i = n i f° r a *l *'» but this implies p { = q t = for i $ H and/&gt; 4 ^ n u q { &lt; n x

for i g H; there are therefore 1 1 (n t + 1) ordered pairs (/, u) in N (I) such that

i G H

t + u — s.

455



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

We can therefore consider the total algebra of the monoid N (I) over A, which
contains the (restricted) algebra A[X i ] ( 6 x of this monoid. It is a unital commuta-
tive associative algebra called the algebra of formal power series in the indeterminates
X, (i g I) with coefficients in A and denoted by A[[X,]] f eI ; its elements are called
formal power series in the indeterminates Xj (i e I) with coefficients in A. Such
an element (a v ) v e N a&gt; is also denoted, following the convention made in

no. 10, by 2, &lt;x v X v ; the &lt;x v are the coefficients of the formal power series and

the a v X v its terms; a polynomial in the X ( is therefore a formal power series with
only a. finite number of terms ^ 0.

Clearly an algebra isomorphism A[[Xt]] l6ll -&gt; A[[X J ]] iel2 is canonically
derived from every bijection a: I x -&gt; I 2 by mapping the formal power series

2, 0L, ni s . 1 1 X?' to the formal power series 2-, a (ni) * 1 1 XlV

Let J be a subset of I; the algebra A[[Xj]] ieJ can be identified with a sub-
algebra of A[[X 4 ]] leI consisting of the formal power series 2-, a (n) .l 1 X"'

where a (n() = for every element (n t ) e N (I) such that n t ^ for at least one
index iel —J. Further, if K = I — J, A[[Xj]] ieI is canonically identified
with (A[[Xj,]] yeJ )[[X fc ]] fc6K , by identifying the formal power series

2* &lt;x., nA . 1 1 X?' with the formal power series 2, B (mt) . I 1 X£ fc , where

(n ( ) Kno iel ^ r (m fc ) rKmk) fceK

with y (Py) = a (n() for the sequence (n t ) such that n t = p t for i e J and n t = m t for
ieK.

Given a formal power series u = 2, a v X v , the terms a v X v such that |v| = p

are called the terms in u of total degree p. The formal power series u p whose
terms of total degree p are those of u and whose other terms are zero, is called
the homogenous part of u of degree p; when I is finite, u p is a polynomial for allp; u
is identified with an element of A (also called the constant term of u). If u and v
are two formal power series and w = uv, then



p
(39) w p = Z q u r v p . %



for every integer p ^ 0.

For every formal power series a^O, the least integer/* ^ such that u p ^
is called the total order (or simply the order) of u. If this order is denoted by
&lt;o(tt) and u and &amp; are two formal power series #0, then

(40) a(u + v) ^ inf(&lt;o(tt), «(»)) if k + v #

(41) &lt;«&gt;(*«&gt;) &gt; co(m) + &lt;o(z&gt;) if uv ^ 0.

456



GRADED ALGEBRAS § 3. 1

Further, if g&gt;(k) # &lt;o(»), then necessarily u + v ^ and the two sides of
(40) are equal.

Note that the order of is not defined. By an abuse of language, it is a
convention to say that "fis a formal power series of order ^p (resp. &gt;p)"
if the homogeneous part of/ of degree n is zero for all n &lt; p (resp. n &lt; p) ;
is therefore a "formal power series of order &gt;/&gt;" for every integer p ^ 0.

Let J be a subset of I and let AffXj]]^! be identified as above with
B [[ X fc]]fc6Kj where K = I —J and B = A[rX y ]]j 6j ; corresponding to the
above definitions applied to B[[X fc ]] fceK there are new definitions for the formal

power series u e A[[X,]] iEl ; a term a (fl() .l 1 Xj 1 ' is said to be of degree p in the

X 4 of index i e K if 2* n K = p and the formal power series of B[[X fc ]] fceK with

the same terms of degree p as u and the others zero is called the homogenous part
of degree p in the X { of index ieK. If u # 0, the order &lt;o k (m) with respect to the
X t of index i e K is the smallest of the integers/? ^ such that the homogeneous
part of u of degree p in the X 4 of index i e K is ^0. Inequalities (40) and (41)
still hold when o&gt; is replaced by w K .



§ 3. GRADED ALGEBRAS

The graduations considered in this paragraph will have as set of degrees a
commutative monoid written additively whose identity element is denoted by 0.

1. GRADED ALGEBRAS

Definition 1. Let A be a commutative monoid, A a graded ring of type A (II, §11,
no. 2), (A x ) XeA its graduation and E an A-algebra. A graduation (E x ) XeA of type A
on the additive group E is said to be compatible with the A-algebra structure on E if it
is compatible both with the A-module and with the ring structure on E, in other words, if,
for all X, [x in A,

(1) A X E W c E A+U

(2) E X E. c E„ +H .

The A-algebra E, with this graduation, is then called a graded algebra of type A over
the graded ring A.

When the graduation on A is trivial (that is (II, §11, no. 1) A = A, A K = {0}
for X#0), condition (1) means that the E x are sub-A-modules of E. This leads
to the definition of the notion of graded algebra of type A over a non-graded

457



HI TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

commutative ring A: A is given the trivial graduation of type A and the above
definition is applied.

When we consider graded A-algebras E with a unit element e, it will always be
understood that e is of degree (cf. Exercise 1).

It follows that if an invertible element x e E is homogeneous and of degree p, its
inverse # -1 is homogeneous and of degree —p: it suffices to decompose x' 1 as a
sum of homogeneous elements in the relations x~ x x = xx' 1 = e.

Let E and E' be two graded algebras of type A over a graded ring A of type
A. An A-algebra homomorphism u : E -&gt;■ E' is called a graded algebra homo-
morphism if «(E X ) c= E^ for all X 6 A (where (E x ) and (E^,) denote the respective
graduations of E and E') ; where E and E' are associative and unital and u is
unital, this condition means that u is a graded ring homomorphism (II, §11,
no. 2).

Let E be a graded A-algebra of type N. E is identified with a graded A-alge-
bra of type Z by writing E n = {0} for n &lt; 0.

Remark. Definition 1 can also be interpreted by saying that E is a graded A-
module and that the A-linear mapping

m:E ® A E-&gt;E

defining the multiplication on E (§1, no. 3), is homogeneous of degree when
E ® A E is given its graduation of type A (II, § 11, no. 5).

To define a graded A-algebra structure of type A on the graded ring A, with
E as underlying graded A-module, therefore amounts to defining for each
ordered pair (X, \i) of elements of A a Z-bilinear mapping

W Au :E A. X E ii-*- E A. + U

such that for every triple of indices (X, (x, v) and for a e A Ki x e E w , y e E v ,
a-»*iiv(*&gt;y) = m K+»,v(&lt;*x,y) = iu tfiX+v (*, ay).

Examples. (1) Let B be a graded ring of type A; if B is given its canonical Z-
algebra structure (§ 1 , no. 1 , Example 2) , B is a graded A-algebra (Z being given
the trivial graduation).

(2) Let A be a graded commutative ring of type A and M a graded A-
module of type A. Suppose that all the elements of the monoid A are cancellable,
which allows (II, §11, no. 6) us to define on Homgr A (M, M) = Endgr A (M) a
graded A-module structure of type A; as this graduation is compatible with the
ring structure on Endgr A (M) (II, §11, no. 6), it defines a unital graded A-algebra
structure on the A-algebra Endgr A (M).

(3) Algebra of a magma. Let S be a magma and &lt;j&gt;: S — &gt; A a homomorphism.

-l
For all XeA, we write S x = (j&gt; (X); then S^S W &lt;= S K + il . Let A be a graded

commutative ring of type A and (A x ) XeA its graduation; we shall define a

graded A-algebra structure on the algebra E = A (S) of the magma S (§ 2,

458



GRADED SUBALGEBRAS, GRADED IDEALS OF A GRADED ALGEBRA § 3.2

no. 6). To this end, let E x denote the additive subgroup of E generated by
the elements of the form a. s such that a e A u , s e S v and (x + v = X. As the S K
are pairwise disjoint, E is the direct sum of the A W S V and hence also the direct
sum of the E^ and it is immediate that the E x satisfy conditions (1) and (2) and
therefore define on E the desired graded A-algebra structure. If S admits an
identity element e, it may also be supposed that §(e) = 0. A particular case is
the one where the graduation of the ring A is trivial; then E K is the sub-A-
module of E generated by S v More particularly, if we take S = N (I) , A = N

and cj&gt; the mapping such that &lt;i&gt;(( w i)) = 2-, n i3 the ring A having the trivial

graduation, a graduation is thus obtained on the polynomial algebra ApCJigj,
for which the degree of a homogeneous polynomial ^ is the total degree defined
in § 2, no. 9 (cf. § 6, no. 6).

We now take S to be the free monoid Mo(B) of a set B (I, § 7, no. 2) and &lt;}&gt; the
homomorphism Mo(B) -&gt; N which associates with each word its length. Thus
a graded A-algebra structure is obtained on the free associative algebra of the set
B (§2, no. 7;cf. §5, no. 5).

2. GRADED SUBALGEBRAS, GRADED IDEALS OF A GRADED ALGEBRA

Let E be a graded algebra of type A over a graded ring A of type A. If F is a
sub-A-algebra of E which is a graded sub- A-module, then the graduation (F,J on F
is compatible with its A-algebra structure, since F x = F n E^; in this case F is
called a graded subalgebra of E and the canonical injection F -&gt; E is a graded
algebra homomorphism.

Similarly, if a is a left (resp. right) ideal of E which is a graded sub- A-module,
then E x o w c a K+il (resp. a^E w &lt;= o x+u ), since &lt;x K = a n E^; then a is called a
graded ideal of the algebra E. If b is a graded two-sided ideal of E the quotient
graduation on the module E/b is compatible with the algebra structure on E/b
and the canonical homomorphism E-&gt; E/b is a graded algebra homomorphism.

If u: E -&gt; E' is a graded algebra homomorphism, Im(«) is a graded sub-
algebra of E', Ker(tt) is a graded two-sided ideal of E and the bijection
E/Ker(«) -&gt; Im(w) canonically associated with u is a graded algebra iso-
morphism.

Proposition 1. Let A be a graded commutative ring of type A, E a graded A-algebra
of type A and S a set of homogeneous elements ofE. Then the sub-A-algebra (resp. left
ideal, right ideal, two-sided ideal) generated by S is a graded subalgebra (resp. graded
ideal).

The subalgebra of E generated by S is the sub-A-module generated by the
finite products of elements of S, which are homogeneous; similarly, the left
(resp. right) ideal generated by S is the sub-A-module generated by the ele-
ments of the form u x (u 2 ( . . . (u n s)) . . . ) (resp. ( . . . ((«/ n )w„_i) . . . )« 2 ) M i) where

459



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

s e S and the Uj e E are homogeneous (n arbitrary) and these products are
homogeneous, whence in this case the conclusion by virtue of II, § 11, no. 3,
Proposition 2) ; finally the two-sided ideal generated by S is the union of the
sequence (9„)„&gt;i, where Q x is the left ideal generated by S and 3 2n (resp.
3 2n + 1 ) the right (resp. left) ideal generated by 3 2 n-i (resp. 9 2n ), which com-
pletes the proof.

3. DIRECT LIMITS OF GRADED ALGEBRAS

Let (Aa, &lt;j) 0a ) be a directed direct system of graded commutative rings of type A
(II, § 1 1, no. 3, Remark 3) and for each a let E a be a graded A a -algebra of type
A; for a ^ (3 let/ 0ot : E a -&gt; E p be an A a -homomorphism of graded algebras and
suppose that/ Ya =/^o/ to for a &lt; (3 ^ y; then we shall call (E a ,/ Pa ) a
directed direct system of graded algebras of type A over the directed direct system
(Aa, &lt;j&gt; Pa ) of graded commutative rings of type A. Then we know (II, § 1 1, no. 3)
that E = lim E a has canonically a graded module structure of type A over the
graded ring A = lim A a and a multiplication such that E^E* c= E x+U (where
(E*) denotes the graduation on E) ; then this multiplication and the graded
A-module structure on E define on E a graded A-algebra structure of type A; E,
with this structure, is called the direct limit of the direct system (E a ,/ 3a ) of
graded algebras. The canonical homomorphisms E a -&gt; E are taken A a -homo-
morphisms of graded algebras. Moreover, if F is a graded A-algebra of type A
and (m k ) a direct system of A a -homomorphisms u a : E a -&gt; F, u — lim u a is an
A-homomorphism of graded algebras.



§ 4. TENSOR PRODUCTS OF ALGEBRAS

From § 4 to § 8 inclusive, A denotes a commutative ring and, unless otherwise mentioned,
the algebras considered are assumed to be associative and unital and the algebra homo-
morphisms are assumed to be unital.

1. TENSOR PRODUCT OF A FINITE FAMILY OF ALGEBRAS

A always denotes a commutative ring with unit element. Let (E,) i6l be a

finite family of A-algebras and let E = ® E 4 be the tensor product A-module

of the A-modules E t (II, § 3, no. 9). We shall define an A-algebra structure on E.
Let m t : E 4 ® A E t —&gt;■ E t be the A-linear mapping defining the multiplication on
E, (§ 1, no. 3). Consider the A-linear mapping

m' = ® m ( : ® (E 4 ® A E t ) -&gt; (g) E t = E;

iel iel iel

460



TENSOR PRODUCT OF A FINITE FAMILY OF ALGEBRAS § 4. 1

the composite mapping

(S8 E -) ®* C&lt;§ E ') ^* .&lt;§ &lt; E &lt; ®* E &lt;&gt; -^ i§ E '

where t is the associativity isomorphism (II, § 3, no. 9) is an A-linear mapping
m : E ® A E -&gt; E ; we shall see that m defines an (associative and unital) algebra
structure on E. For, on explicitly performing the multiplication defined by m,
we obtain the formula

(1) C§*)(i§y«)~ $§(*«*«) farcin ^and.e I.

It is therefore seen already, by linearity, that if e i is the unit element of E t ,
e ~ iei e% * S ur ^ t e ^ ement °f E. On tne other hand, the associativity of each of
the E f implies the relation

whence, by linearity, the relation x(yz) = (xy)z for all x,y, z in E.

Definition 1. Given a family (E f ) j6l of algebras over A, the tensor product of

this family, denoted by 0E, (or, when I is the interval (1, n) of N,

Ei &lt;8&gt;a E 2 • • • &lt;g) A E n , or simply Ej ® E 2 ® • • • E n ) i w /&amp;? a/£^ra obtained
by giving the tensor product of the A-modules E, the multiplication defined by (I).

Relation (1) shows that the tensor product ® E, of the opposite algebras to

the E, is the opposite algebra to §9 E 4 ; in particular, if the E 4 are commutative,

so is (£y E { .
iei l

Let (E,) JeI and (F ( ), eI be two families of A-algebras with the same finite

indexing set I. For each i e I, let/,: E t -&gt; F, be an A-algebra homomorphism.

Then the A-linear mapping

is an A-algebra homomorphism, as follows from (1).

For every partition (Iy)y eJ of I, the associativity isomorphisms



®(®E I )-*®E I



(II, § 3, no. 9) are also algebra isomorphisms, as follows from (1) and their
definitions.

461



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

When I is the interval (1, n) of N and all the algebras E t are equal to the
same algebra E, the tensor product algebra &amp; E, is also denoted by E® n .

We shall restrict our attention in the remainder of this no. to the properties
of tensor products of two algebras, leaving to the reader the task of extending
them to tensor products of arbitrary finite families.

Let E, F be two A-algebras; if o (resp. b) is a left ideal of E (resp. F), the
canonical image Im(a ® b) of a ® A l&gt; in E &lt;g) A F is a left ideal of E (g) A F;
there are analogous results when "left ideal" is replaced by "right ideal" or
"two-sided ideal". Moreover:

Proposition 1. Let E, F be two A-algebras and a (resp. b) a two-sided ideal ofE
(resp. F). Then the canonical A-module isomorphism

(E/a) &lt;g&gt; (E/b) -&gt; (E ® F)/(Im(a &lt;g&gt; F) + Im(E ® b))

(II, § 3, no. 6, Corollary 1 to Proposition 6) is an algebra isomorphism.
This follows from (1) and the definition given loc. cit.

Corollary 1. Let E be an A-algebra and a an ideal of A. Then the A-module oE
is a two-sided ideal qfJL and the canonical (Aj a) -module isomorphism

(A/a) &lt;g&gt; A E -&gt; E/aE

is an (Aj a) -algebra isomorphism.

Corollary 2. If a, b are two ideals of A, (A/a) (g) A (A/b) is canonically iso-
morphic to A/ (a -+- b).

Corollary 3. Let E, F be two A-algebras and a an ideal of A contained in the
annihilator of F. Then the (A/a)-algebra E (g) A F is canonically isomorphic to

(E/aE) ® A/a F.

Proposition 2. Let (EJ XeL and (F u ) ueM be two families of A-algebras. The
canonical mapping (II, § 3, no. 7)

(®Ej\ &lt;g&gt; A (®F,i)-&gt; © (E„® A FJ
is an algebra isomorphism.

This follows immediately from II, § 3, no. 7, Proposition 7 and the definition
of multiplication on E (g) F.

Proposition 3. Let A, B be two commutative rings, p : A -» B a ring homomor-
phism and E, F two A-algebras. Then the canonical B-module isomorphism

P*(E)&lt;g&gt; B p*(F)-&gt;P*(E&lt;g) A F)

(II, § 5, no. 1, Proposition 3) is a B-algebra isomorphism.

462



UNIVERSAL CHARACTERIZATION OF TENSOR PRODUCTS OF ALGEBRAS § 4.2

Proposition 4. Let A, B be two commutative rings, p : A -» B a ring homomorphism,
E an A-algebra and F a B-algebra. Then the canonical A-module isomorphism

p*(F)® A E-&gt;p*(F&lt;g) B p*(E))

(II, § 5, no. 2, Proposition 6) is an A-algebra isomorphism.

The verifications are trivial on account of § 1, no. 5.

In particular, the A-algebra structure on B ® A E, obtained by restricting
the ring B of scalars to A, is identical with the structure of the algebra B &lt;g) A E,
the tensor product of the A-algebras B and E.

Finally, if (A,, &lt;J&gt; yi ) is a direct system of commutative rings, (Ej,^) and
(F J} gji) two direct systems of A,-algebras (§ 1, no. 6) and A = lim A,, the
canonical A-module isomorphism

lim (E, ® Aj F,) -&gt; (Hm E,) ® A (lim F,)

(II, § 6, no. 3, Proposition 7) is also an A-algebra isomorphism, as follows from the
definitions.

Examples of tensor products of algebras. (1) Let A be a commutative ring and
M, N two A-modules; the canonical mapping

(2) End A (M) &lt;g&gt; A End A (N) -&gt; End A (M ® A N)

(II, § 4, no. 4) is an A-algebra homomorphism, as follows from II, § 3, no. 2,
formula (5). When M or N is a. finitely generated projective A-module, we know
that this homomorphism is bijective (II, § 4, no. 4, Proposition 4). In particular
we recover the definition of the tensor product of two square matrices.

(2) Let S, T be two monoids and A &lt;S) and A (T) the algebras of the monoids
S and T over the ring A (III, § 2, no. 6) ; then there is a canonical A-algebra
isomorphism

(3) A (s &gt;® A A&lt; T &gt;^A (SxT &gt;.

The elements e s (g) e t (resp. e (St t) , where s runs through S and t runs through
T, form a basis of A (S) ® A A (T) by virtue of II, § 3, no. 7, Corollary 2 to Proposi-
tion 7 (resp. of A (SxT) ; the desired isomorphism is obtained by mapping
e a (g) e t to * (Stt) and it follows from the definitions that this is indeed an algebra
isomorphism.

2. UNIVERSAL CHARACTERIZATION OF TENSOR PRODUCTS OF
ALGEBRAS

Proposition 5. Let (Ej) JeI be a finite family of A-algebras and, for each iel, let
e t be the unit element of E 4 . For each i el, let u x : E t -&gt; E = Qy E 4 be the A-linear
mapping defined by

u i( x i) =yyx'j with x\ = x t and x' t = e^forj ^ i.

463



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(i) The « { are A-algebra isomorphisms ; further, for i =^j, the elements ufa) and
Uj{Xj) are permutable in Efor all x t e E { and x } e E y and E is generated by the union of
the subalgebras t/^Ej).

(ii) Let F be an A-algebra and, for all i e I, let v x \ E 4 -&gt; F be an A-algebra homo-
morphism, where the v % are such that, for i # j, v t (x t ) and Vj(x } ) are permutable in F
for all Xi e E 4 and x } e E y . Then there exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism
w: E-&gt;F such that

(4) v t = w °u t for all i e I.

(i) The mapping u K is an algebra homomorphism by definition of the multi-
plication on E. If i # j, Xi e E i} x s e E„ then

«i(*i) = ® x 'k with x' t = x t , x' k = e k for k # i,
u A x i) = ® x" k with x) = x J} x" k = e k for k # j.

Clearly *£*£ = xfa' k for all k e I and hence i^fa) and «,(*,) commute in E by
formula (1) (no. 1) defining the multiplication in E. The last assertion follows

from the relation 09 # t = 1 1 ufa).

(ii) For each i e I, let * t be an element of E 4 . The product l g l z&gt; t (* { ) is then
defined in F independently of any ordering on I since the algebra F is associa-
tive and the elements o t (* f ) are pairwise permutable. The mapping

(*i)iei -»■ -Li v i( x i) of 1 J- E i into F is obviously A-multilinear and there there-
fore exists one and only one A-linear mapping w: E -&gt;- F such that

(5) a&gt;(^*i) =TliV l (x i ).

Now, the desired A-algebra homomorphism w:E-»F must satisfy (5),
which follows from (4) and the fact that ® x t = l g l «i(x«). This proves the

uniqueness of 10; it remains to show that the A-linear mapping w defined by
(5) is an A-algebra homomorphism and satisfies (4) . The fact that w satisfies
(4) is obvious: it suffices to apply (5) to the case where x t = e t forj ^ i and
we obtain wfafa)) = o t (^ t ). Finally, w is an algebra homomorphism, for

w((® *&lt;)(®y t )) = w($$) {XiyS) = II *,(* f y f )

= II (Vi(x t )Vi(yi)) = (Ylvi(Xi)).(r[vi(yi))
464



MODULES AND MULTIMODULES OVER TENSOR PRODUCTS OF ALGEBRAS § 4.3

since vfa) commutes with Vj(jj) for J ^ i; hence

ww((%&gt; *,) (&lt;g&gt; „)) = w(® *,) . «.(&lt;§&gt; y.)
which, by linearity, completes the proof.

The ordered pair consisting of E and the canonical mapping § : (x t ) f-&gt; §y # t

of 1 1 Ej into E is a solution of the universal mapping problem (Set Theory, IV, § 3,
no. 1) where 2 is the species of A-algebra structure, the morphisms being the
A-algebra homomorphisms and the a-mappings the mappings 1 1 « ( of

I 1 E t into an A-algebra such that the u { are A-algebra homomorphisms and
u t (x t ) and Uj(xj) commute for i # j, for all # t e E t and x t e E y .
Corollary. Let (Ej) i6l , (F,) JeI be two finite families of A-algebras and, for all
i e I, letf : E f -&gt; F t be an algebra homomorphism. Ifu t : E, -&gt; vy E y , v t : F 4 -&gt;• 09 F y

i el i 6 1

are the canonical homomorphisms, the mapping f = &lt;yf (cf. no. 1) is the unique A-
algebra homomorphism such thatfo u t = z&gt; 4 °fifor all i e I.

It suffices to note that the homomorphisms g t = v t of are such that
gt(*i) = Vi(fi(*i)) and gj(xj) = Vjif^)) commute fori ^i, *i e E 4 and*, £ E,;
then apply Proposition 5.

When, in Proposition 5, the algebra F is assumed to be commutative, the
hypothesis that ofa) and v j (x j ) are permutable for i ^j is automatically
satisfied. Hence, when F is commutative, there is a canonical bijection

(6) Hom A . alg .((^) E i5 F) -&gt; II Hom A . alg . (E j} F),

namely the one which associates with every homomorphism w of §y E 4 into F

the family of w o u t .

Note that if E is a commutative A-algebra, the ring structure of E ® A F is
the same as that of F (E) (§ 1, no. 5).

3. MODULES AND MULTIMODULES OVER TENSOR PRODUCTS OF
ALGEBRAS

Definition 2. Let E be a (unital) A-algebra. A left (resp. right) E-module is a left
(resp. right) module over the underlying ring qfE.

Unless otherwise mentioned, all the modules and multimodules considered
in this no. are left modules and multimodules.

If M is an E-module, the homomorphism yj: A-&gt;E (§1, no. 4) then

465



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

defines on M an A-module structure, said to be underlying the E-module struc-
ture on M; for a 6 A, s e E, x e M,

(7) ol(sx) = s(&lt;xx) = (otf)#,

so that for all seE, the homothety h s : x i-&gt; sx of M is an endomorphism of the
underlying A-module structure. Conversely, being given an E-module struc-
ture on M is equivalent to being given an A-module structure on M and an
A-algebra homomorphism s •-&gt;■ h s of E into End A (M).

Definition 3. Let E and F be two (unital) A-algebras and M a set with an E-module
structure and an E-module structure. M is called a {left) bimodule over the algebras E
and F if:

(1) M is a bimodule over the underlying rings ofE and F (II, § 1, no. 14) ;

(2) the two A-module structures underlying the E-module and E-module structures on
M are identical.

The latter condition says that if e and e' are the unit elements of E and F
respectively, then

(8) (&lt;ze)x = (cu')x for a e A, x e M;

then ojc is used to denote the common value of the two sides.

It can also be said that being given on M a bimodule structure over E and F
is equivalent to being given an A-module structure on M and also two A-algebra
homomorphisms s^h' s of E into End A (M) and t *-* hi of F into End A (M)
such that h'X = h" t h' s for all s e E and t e F. Consequently (no. 2, Proposi-
tion 5) an A-algebra homomorphism u h&gt; h u of E ® A F into End A (M) is ca-
nonically derived such that h, 9t = KK = KK for s e E and *gF. In other
words, an (E ® A F) -module structure is thus defined on M, which is said to be
associated with the given bimodule structure over E and F and under which

(s ® t) .x = s(tx) — t{sx) for s e E, t e F and *eM.

The given E-module and F-module structures on M can be derived from this
(E ® A F) -module structure by restrictions of the ring of scalars, corresponding
to the two canonical homomorphisms E -&gt; E &lt;g) A F and F -*- E ® A F.

Conversely, if an (E ® A F) -module structure is given on M, by means of
the canonical homomorphisms E -&gt; E ® A F and F -&gt; E &lt;g) A F an E-module
structure and an F-module structure on M and it is immediate that M is a
bimodule over the algebras E and F with these two structures and that the given
(E ® A F) -module structure is associated with this bimodule structure.

Thus a one-to-one correspondence has been established between (E ® A F)-
module and bimodules over the algebras E and F. Clearly every sub-bimodule
of M is a submodule for the associated (E &lt;g) A F) -module structure and con-

466



MODULES AND MULTIMODULES OVER TENSOR PRODUCTS OF ALGEBRAS § 4.3

versely. There are analogous results for quotients, products, direct sums and
inverse and direct limits. Finally, if M' is another bimodule over the algebras
E and F and/: M -&gt; M' is a bimodule homomorphism, /is also an (E ® A F)-
module homomorphism and conversely.

There are obviously corresponding statements for right bimodule structures,
or when for example there is a left E-module structure and a right F-module
structure; in this case we speak of an (E, F) -bimodule and being given such a
structure amounts to being given a left bimodule structure over E and F°.

Examples. (1) Let B be an A-algebra; the ring B has canonically a (B, B)-
bimodule structure (II, § 1, no. 14, Example 1) and, if e is the unit element of B,
then (ax)x = x(cce) = ooc for all # e B and all a e A; B can therefore be con-
sidered as a left bimodule over the algebras B and B° (opposite to B) ; there is
therefore associated with the (B, B) -bimodule structure on B a (B ® A B )-
module structure such that, for b, x and b' in B,

(9) (b ® b') .x = bxb'

the right-hand side being the product in the ring B.

(2) Let E and F be two A-algebras, e, e' their respective unit elements, M an
E-module and N an F-module; these module structures define on M a bi-
module structure over the rings A and E and on N a bimodule structure over
the rings A and F; from these is therefore derived a bimodule structure over
the rings E and F on the tensor product M ® A N, defined by

x.(m (g) n) = (x.m) ® n, y.(m (g) n) = m (g) (y.n)

for x e E, y e F, m e M, n e N (II, § 3, no. 4) ; it is also seen that conditions (8)
hold and hence the above bimodule structure is associated with an (E ® A F)-
module structure on M ® A N, such that

(10) (*0y).(m0n) = (x.m) &lt;g) (y.n)

for x e E, y e F, m e M, n e N.

In particular, taking M = E s , E s ® A N has canonically an (E &lt;g) A F)-
module structure; on the other hand, E ® A N is canonically identified with
E &lt;S&gt;a (F&lt;j &lt;S&gt;f N) = (E A F) ® P N, where E ® A F is considered as having
its right F-module structure defined by the canonical homomorphism
v. F -&gt; E ® A F; for x, x' in E, y g F, n e N, x' ® n is thus identified with
(x' ® e') &lt;S&gt;n and (x &lt;g&gt;y).(x' &lt;g) n') = (xx') ® (y.n) with ((xx f ) ®y) ® n.
The (E ® A F) -module E s ® A N is thus identified with the (E &lt;g) A F) -module
derived from N by extending the scalars to E ® A F by means of the homo-
morphism v (II, § 5, no. 1). The canonical mapping n h-&gt; e &lt;g) n of N into
E s ® a N is identified with the canonical mapping n ■-». (e ® e') ® n of N into
(E (g) A F) ® F N; this is known to be an F-homomorphism.

467



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

With the same notation, let P be a right (E ® A F) -module; then there is a
canonical Z-module isomorphism

(11) P &lt;g&gt; E0AP (E, ® A N) ^P &lt;g) P N

where on the right-hand side P is considered as a right F-module by means of
the canonical homomorphism v. For P is canonically identified with
P ®e® a f ( E ®aF) and (E &lt;g) A F) ® P N with E ® A (F ® F N) and hence
with E (g) A N, which estabUshes the stated isomorphism (II, § 3, no. 8, Proposi-
tion 8 and II, § 3, no. 4, proposition 4).
All the above extends to multimodules (II, § 1, no. 14).

4. TENSOR PRODUCT OF ALGEBRAS OVER A FIELD

Let K be a commutative field and E, F two algebras over K whose respec-
tive unit elements e, e' are non-zero. Then the homomorphisms y) e :K-&gt;E
and y) p : K -&gt; F (§1, no. 3) are injections which allow us to identify K with
a subfield of E (resp. F). The canonical homomorphisms u: E — &gt;• E ® K F and
v: F -» E ® K F, defined by u(x) = x ® e' and v(y) = e &lt;g&gt;y are injective (II,
§ 7, no. 9, Proposition 19) and allow us to identify E and F with subalgebras of
E (S&gt;k F, both having as unit element the unit element e ® e' of E ® K F. In
E ® K F, E n F = K (II, § 7, no. 9, Proposition 19).

If E' and F' are subalgebras of E and F respectively, the canonical homo-
morphism E' &lt;g&gt; K F' -&gt; E K F is injective and allows us to identify E' ® K F'
with the subalgebra of E ® K F generated by E' U F' (II, § 7, no. 7, Proposition
14).

Proposition 6. Let E, F be two non-zero algebras over a commutative field, K, C
(resp. D) a subalgebra of E (resp. F) and C (resp. D') the centralizer qfCinE
(resp. D in F). Then the centralizer ofC ® K D in E ® K FwC ® K D'.

It all reduces to verifying that an element z — 2-, x { ® y 4 of the centralizer

of C &lt;g) K D (# { g F, y t e F) belongs to C &lt;g) K D'; we know that

C ® K D' = (C ® K F) n (E ® K D')

(II, § 7, no. 7, Corollary to Proposition 14). The y, may be assumed to be
linearly independent over K; for all x e C, of necessity (x ® e')z = z(x &lt;g) «'),

that is .2* (tftfj — x t x) ^y x =0, whence xx t = x t x for all i (II, § 3, no. 7,

Corollary 1 to Proposition 7) ; hence of necessity x t e C for all i and therefore
zeC (g) K F; it can similarly be shown that z e E &lt;g) K D', whence the proposi-
tion.

Corollary. IfZ and Z' are the respective centres qfE and F, the centre o/*E ® K F m
Z ® K Z'.

468



TENSOR PRODUCT OF ALGEBRAS OVER A FIELD § 4.4

Let E and F be two subalgebras of an algebra G over a commutative field
K; suppose that every element of E commutes with every element of F. Then the
canonical injections i: E -&gt; G, j: F -&gt; G define a canonical homomorphism
h = i j: E K F -&gt; G (no. 2, Proposition 5) such that

(i ® j) (# ® y) = #y for x e E, y g F.

Definition 4. G&amp;vn an algebra G ozw a commutative field K, too subalgebras F,F of
G are jam/ /o fo linearly disjoint over K if they satisfy the following conditions:

(1) izruy element ofF commutes with every element ofF;

(2) ffo canonical homomorphism of Ft ® K F m/o G is infective.

Proposition 7. Z^ G be an algebra over a commutative field K and E, F two sub-
algebras ofG such that every element ofF commutes with every element ofF. For E and F
to be linearly disjoint over K, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist a basis of E
over K which is a free subset of G for the right F-module structure on G. When this is so :

(i) the canonical homomorphism hi E ® K F — &gt; G is an isomorphism of E ® K F
onto the subalgebra ofG generated by E U F;

(ii) E n F = K;

(iii) every free subset ofF (resp. F) over K is a free subset ofG with its right or
left F-module (resp. F-module) structure.

The condition of the statement is obviously necessary, since every basis of E
over K is a basis of E ® K F with its right F-module structure (II, § 3, no. 7,
Corollary 1 to Proposition 7). To see that the condition is sufficient, note that

the image H of E ® K F under h is the set of sums 2i, x % y t = 2i, y t Xi in G, with

x t eF andy, e F; if (a K ) is a basis of E over K, H is therefore also the submodule
of the (right or left) F-module G, generated by (a x ). The condition of the state-
ment therefore means that there exists a basis (a^) of E which is also a basis of
the F-module H; it follows that h is injective. Assertion (iii) follows from the
fact that every free subset of E is contained in a basis of E (II, § 7, no. 1,
Theorem 2).

Corollary 1. For the canonical homomorphism ofF ® K F into G to be bijective,
it is necessary and sufficient that there exist a basis of E over K which is a basis of the
{right or left) F-module G.

Corollary 2. Let E, F be two subalgebras ofG, of finite rank over K and such that
every element ofF commutes with every element ofF. For E and F to be linearly disjoint
over K, it is necessary and sufficient that the subalgebra Ho/G generated by E U F be
such that

(12) [H:K] = [E:K].[F:K].

This says that the rank over K of the surjective canonical homomorphism

469



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

h: E &lt;g) K F -&gt; H is equal to the rank of E (g) K F over K, which is equivalent to
saying that this homomorphism is bijective (II, § 7, No. 4, Proposition 9).

5. TENSOR PRODUCT OF AN INFINITE FAMILY OF ALGEBRAS

Let A be a commutative ring and (Ej)^! an arbitrary family of (unital) A-

algebras. For every finite subset J of I, let Ej denote the tensor product yy E t

of the algebras E { of index ie]; let e t denote the unit element of E 4 and

ej = yy e t the unit element of Ej; letjfj t t denote the canonical homomorphism

E, -&gt; Ej for i e J (no. 2, Proposition 5). If J, J' are two finite subsets of I such
that J C J', a homomorphism /j, j : Ej-S'-Ej, is canonically derived (no. 2,
Proposition 5), by the condition f 3 . 3 °f 3 tJ = f r ti for all ie]. Moreover
the uniqueness of/j-j implies that if J, J', J" are three finite subsets of I such
that JcJ'c J", then/j»j = ./j»j&lt; of rj . In other words, (Ej,/^) is a direct
system of A-algebras whose indexing set is the right directed set 5(1) of finite
subsets of I.

Definition 5. The direct limit E of the direct system (Ej,f rj ) is called the tensor
product of the family of A-algebras (Ej), 6l .

If I is finite, E is identified with Qy E,. By an abuse of notation, E is also

' fel * ' '

denoted by Qy E { even if I is infinite.

7 iel '

For every finite subset J of I, let^/j denote the canonical homomorphism
yy E t -&gt; yy E { (writing/ 4 instead of/J i} ) ; if e is the unit element of yy E i5 then
fj(ej) = e for all J e 5(1)- It is immediate that if all the algebras E 4 are com-
mutative, so is yy E,.

Proposition 8. (i) The homomorphisms f : Ej -&gt; E = yy E k are such that for two

indices i,j such that i j± j,fx{xi) andf^Xj) commute in Efor all x t e E, and x f e E^;
further, E is generated by the union of the sub algebras ./{(Ej).

(ii) Let F be an A-algebra and, for all iel, let u t : E ( -&gt; F be an A-algebra
homomorphism such that, for i # j, Ui(x t ) and u^Xj) commute in F for all x t eE t and
x 4 £ Ej. Then there exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism u : E — &gt; F such
that u t = u °ffor all i e I.

(i) As, for every finite subset J of I, f =fj of Jt i} the first assertion in (i)
follows from no. 2, Proposition 5, taking J containing i andj; the second also
follows from no. 2, Proposition 5, taking account of the fact that E is the union
of theJj(Ej) when J runs through 5(1)-

(ii) For every finite subset J of I, it follows from no. 2, Proposition 5
that there exists a unique homomorphism Wj : Ej -&gt; F such that Uj of Jt = u t

470



TENSOR PRODUCT OF AN INFINITE FAMILY OF ALGEBRAS § 4.5

for all iej; it immediately follows from this uniqueness property that, for
J c J', «j = «j, ofj-j", in other words, the t/j form a direct system of homo-
morphisms. Let u = lim u 3 : E -&gt; F; then by definition Uj = u °fj for every

finite subset J of I and in particular u x = u of for all iel; the uniqueness of u
follows from these relations and the fact that the &lt; /J(E J ) generate the algebra E.

Corollary. Let (Ei) l6 i, (EJ) ieI be two families of A-algebras with the same
indexing set and, for all i e I, let u t : E t -&gt;- E' t be an algebra homomorphism. Then there

exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism u : vy E t -&gt; Vy E, such that, for all

iel, the diagram

e* — ^ e;



/.



h



®e, — &gt; ®e;

iel u iel

is commutative, f andf[ denoting the canonical homomorphisms.

It suffices to apply Proposition 8 to the homomorphism f o u t .
The homomorphism u defined in the Corollary to Proposition 8 is denoted
by Qy u t . If J is any subset of I, Proposition 8 can be applied to the family

Udtej of canonical homomorphisms f: E t -&gt; Vy E { = E; a canonical homo-
morphism Ej -&gt; E is derived which is also denoted by^/j and which, when J is
finite, coincides with the homomorphism denoted thus above.

Now let (#i)i&lt;=i be an element of 1 1 E 4 such that the family (# f — e t ) ieI has

finite support H. It is immediate that, if J and J' are two finite subsets of I con-
taining H, then

/j((*i)iej) =/j'((*i)ieJ')-

The common value of the w /j((^ i ) isJ ) for the finite subsets J =&gt; H of I is de-
noted by (*y x,.

' iel *

Proposition 9. Let (E,) leI be a family of A-algebras and for each iel let B t be a
basis o/'E, such that the unit element e t belongs to B,. Let B be the set of elements of the

form yy x t , where (x t ) runs through the set of elements of 1 1 B f such that the family

(x t — e t ) has finite support. Then Bis a basis of the algebra vy E t and this basis con-
tains the unit element e.

For every finite subset J of I, let Bj be the basis of Ej = Q&gt;) E { the tensor
product of the bases B 4 for i e J (II, § 3, no. 9). It follows immediately from the

471



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

definitions that B is the union of theJ^Bj) when J runs through 5(1) and that
./j'j(Bj) c Bj' when J &lt;=■ J'; hence (Bj) is a direct system of subsets of the Ej
and B = lim Bj; the conclusion then follows from II, § 6, no. 2, Corollary to

Proposition 5.

The basis B is also called the tensor product of the bases Bj for iel; when
the conditions of Proposition 9 are fulfilled, the canonical homomorphisms

fjiEj -&gt; E = yy Ej are injective for every subset J of I, for if Bj is the basis of

Ej the tensor product of the B 4 for i e J, it is immediately verified that the
restriction of/j to Bj is injective and maps Bj onto a subset of B.

6. COMMUTATION LEMMAS

Lemma 1. Let Abe a commutative ring, E an A-algebra, (#i)i&lt;i&lt; n a finite sequence
of elements o/*E, (Xj) 1&lt;i&lt;n a finite sequence of elements of A and y an element ofE;
suppose that

(13) x$ = \yx t for 1 &lt; i &lt; n.
Then

(14) {x x x 2 . . . x n )y = (XiXa • • • K)y( x i x 2 . . . x n ).

The lemma being trivial for n = 1, we argue by induction on n ^ 2. Now
(*!* a . . . x n )y = fo . . . * B _i)(* B y)

= (*1 • • • Xn-JiKyXn) = *n((*l • • • x n-l)y) x n,

which, by the induction hypothesis, is equal to

X n (X x . . . ^n-i)y(Xx • • • x n-l) x n = ( A l • • • ^n-lKi)y{ x l • • • x n-l x n)&gt;

whence the lemma.

Lemma 2. Let Abe a commutative ring, E an A-algebra and (^)i &lt;1&lt;n and (yi)i^i^ n
two finite sequences ofn elements ofE; suppose that for 1 ^j^i^n,

(15) x t yj = Xyy^ withT^jEA.
Then

(16) {x x x 2 ...x n ) {y x y 2 . . • y„) = (JJ- *&lt;/) (*iyO (* 2 y 2 ) • • • (*»y»).

The lemma being trivial for n = 1, we again argue by induction on n
for n ^ 2. By virtue of Lemma 1,

(*i • • • *0 {y\ • • • y«) = *i(* a • • ■ x n)yi(y 2 • • • y n )

= (11 Xjj) foyO (* a . . . * B ) (y 2 . . . y n )
and it then suffices to apply the induction hypothesis to obtain (16).

472



COMMUTATION LEMMAS § 4.6

For every family X = (X, y ) of elements of A, with 1 ^j&lt;i^n, and for
every permutation a e &amp; n , we write

(17) s„(X) = O X« = 1J. Xoto.oo,.

Observe that, when A = Z and Xy = — 1 for every ordered pair (i,j)
such that 1 ^j&lt;i^n, e„(X) is just the signature e of the permutation a
(I, §5, no. 7).

Lemma 3. Z,^ A be a commutative ring, E an A-algebra, (A: j ) 1&lt;J&lt;n a finite sequence
of elements ofE and suppose that, for every ordered pair (i,j) of integers such that
1 &lt;j &lt; i &lt; n,

(18) x t Xj — &gt;Hj x J x i w tih X w e A.
Then, for every permutation a e @ n ,

(19) *a(l)*o(2) • • • *a(n) = «o(a)*1*2 • • • *b-

The lemma is trivial for n = 1 and n = 2; we proceed by induction on «
for n ^ 3. If &lt;r(n) = «, relation (19) follows from the induction hypothesis.
Suppose therefore that a(n) = k, k ^ n, and let t be the permutation of
(1, ») denned by

{x(i) — i for i &lt; k

t(?) = i + 1 for k &lt; i &lt; n
r{n) = k.

Let tc = T _1 o a; the permutation n leaves n fixed; now a = t o 7c and
therefore, writing y { = x t(1) , y n(i) = # CT(i) . If i =£ n and j # w, the relations
Tu(f) &gt; 7t(j) and a(i) &gt; o(j) are equivalent (since t is a strictly increasing
mapping of (1, n — 1) into (1, «). For i # n,j ^ n and ct(i') &gt; o(J),

yndiVnO) = x oU) x oU) == ^a(i). oO)*a(/)*o(i) = ^a(i), o(r&gt;ynU)yn(i)

whence, by the induction hypothesis (using the fact that n(n) = n) :

y««&gt;y*&lt;a&gt; • • • y«&lt;»&gt; = l&lt;,&lt;„!&lt;J)&gt;ao) Wowjyiya • • •*»

that is

(20) *c(l)*o(2) • • • *a(n) = \ f&lt;i&lt;l iJ- | )&gt;oW) ^o(0.oW)j*T(l) • • • *T(n)«

Now

X T(1) . . . # T(n ) = *!•.. #fc_i#fc + l • • • x n x k

and this, by Lemma 1, is equal to

(2i) (n x ite )^ ...*,- ( a( n n) x a(0&gt;o(n) )^ ...*„.

473



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Finally, (20) and (21) give



x o(l) • • • x a(n) — a • x l • • • x n

with

* = l&lt;i&lt;»!a&lt;t)&gt;oU) Xa(i) ' oW V-(i&lt;n.y&gt;a(n) Wart))

= i&lt;y.y&gt;atf) &gt; ° (,&gt; - oW) =6oM
which completes the proof of Lemma 3.

7. TENSOR PRODUCT OF GRADED ALGEBRAS RELATIVE TO COMMUTA-
TION FACTORS

Definition 6. Let (A,) jeI be a finite family of commutative monoids written addi-
tively. A system of commutation factors over the A f with values in a commutative ring A
is a system of mappings e w : A, x A y -&gt; A, where i el, j e I, i ^ j satisfying the
following conditions:

(22) e^o, + a,', p y ) = %(&lt;*„ p y )e„(aj, p,)

(23) e y (a i} p y + &amp;) = e w (a i5 P,)s w (a i5 pj)

(24) s w (a i5 P,)e yi (p„ a,) = 1,

/or all a i3 a^ i« A j5 p y , p, wz A y .

If I is given a total ordering and the A, are groups, a system of commutation
factors is defined over the A { by taking for every ordered pair (i,j) such that
i &lt;j an arbitrary Z-bilinear mapping of A t x A y into the (multiplicative)
Z-module A* of invertible elements of the ring A and then writing

e&gt;i(P»ai) = M*, P/))" 1
for j &lt; j.
Note that, since the e w (oc J , p y ) are invertible,

e,,(0, p,) = s w ( ai , 0) = 1,

by virtue of (22) and (23).

Examples. (1) The trivial system of commutation factors consists of the e w
such that s l} (oLi, p y ) = 1 for all i,j, &lt;x { e A,, p y g A,.

(2) If we take A = Z and Aj = Z for all i e I, a system of commutation
factors is obtained by taking s w (a i3 p,) = ( — I) 06 * 3 *. Note that this number
depends only on the parities of oc t and p y and the s iy can therefore be con-
sidered as commutation factors when certain of the A, are equal to Z/2Z
and the others to Z.

These two examples are the most frequent cases encountered in applica-
tions.

474



TENSOR PRODUCT RELATIVE TO COMMUTATION FACTORS § 4.7

Proposition 10. Let A be a commutative ring and (Aj) i6l a finite family of com*
mutative monoids written additively; for each i e I let Ej be a graded A-algebra of
type A 4 . Finally, let (e iy ) be a system of commutation factors over the A t with values

in A. Then there exist a graded A-algebra E of type A = 1 1 A { and for each iel

an algebra homomorphism h t :E t -&gt; E, with the following properties:

(i) J/* (j&gt; t :A t -&gt; A is the canonical homomorphism, then h t is a graded homomorphism

(II, § 11, no. 2), in other words, A,(E|") &lt;= E*t (a i&gt;, where (EJ*) and (E a ) denote the

respective graduations on E f and E.

(ii) If i # j and x t (resp. Xj) is a homogeneous element of E { (resp. E y ) of degree

ocj e A { (resp. (3 y e A^), ffon

(25) h^hjiXj) = e w (a is P/)Ay(*,)A|(*|).

(iii) For «wy A-algebra F anrf a&gt;*ry jyrf«n 0/ homomorphisms f t : E t -»■ F .wtfw-
J^mg Jfo conditions

(26) /i(*i)/i(*i) = «»(«,, Pi)/i(*i)/i(*0,

z&amp;Aire z,^, a:,, a^, oq, (3 y are aj ira (ii), £fon JA^re exists one and only one algebra homo-
morphism f:E -&gt; F jmcA that ft =f°h i for all iel. Moreover the underlying A-

module of E is the tensor product yy E { .

Consider the A-module E = C*) E £ : it is identified with the direct sum of

the submodules E a , where, for each a = (oq) g A, we write E a = 09 E"'; the

E a therefore form a graduation of type A on the A-module E. We shall define
on E a graded A-algebra structure of type A. For this let I be given a total order-
ing; for every ordered pair of elements a = (ocj), (5 = (&amp;) of A, we must first
define an A-bilinear mapping of E a x E B into E a + B , or alternatively an
A-linear mapping m a3 of E a ® A E B into E a + P . We shall define m aB by the
condition

(27) m a3 (((g) *,) ® (§&gt; y,)) = e(a, p) &lt;§ foyO
for x t e E"', y t g E"', where

(28) «(a,P) = rie ii (a i) p i ).

The right hand side of (27) obviously belongs to E a + |3 and the mapping
(# 1} . . ., x n ,y ly . . ,,y n ) &gt;-&gt; s(a, (3) §9 (x t yi) is A-multilinear in the product of
the E"' and the Ef* (1 ^ i " ^ n) . Then it must be proved that the multiplication

475



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

thus defined on E is associative; now, if y = (y*) is a third element of A and
z i e Ej* for 1 &lt; t* &lt; n, then

((&lt;8&gt; *)(&lt;?*))(&lt;?&gt; Zi) = «(« + P, Y)«(«, P) ® ( W i)

((8) ^)((&lt;?&gt;yi)(&lt;?&gt; «)) = «(«, P + Y)«(P, Y) &lt;$ (Wi)
and it reduces to verifying the identity

e(a + P, y)s(a, ft = e(a, P + Y )«(P, y)-
But the latter follows immediately from the relations

e(a + (3,y) =e(a,p)e(p, Y )

s(a, P + Y) = e(a, P)e(a, y)

themselves immediate consequences of the definition (28) and (22) and (23).
If, for all i e I, e t denotes the unit element of E { , we know that e t is homo-
geneous of degree (§ 3, no. 1), hence e = yy e t is homogeneous of degree
and it follows from (27), (28) and the relations

■y (ad, 0) = «y(0, p,) = 1

that e is unit element of E, which completes the definition on E of the desired

graded A-algebra structure. Then take At(*i) = x i &lt;8&gt;0&gt;fyj to verify that

hi( x i x i) — hi{ x i)ht( x D f° r x a x 'i m E J} attention may be confined to the case
where x t and x[ are homogeneous and then this relation follows immediately
from (27) and the relations e^oq, 0) = e (i (0, (3,) = 1 ; the same relations and
(24) prove also that the h { satisfy conditions (i) and (ii) of the statement
and that

(29) i§^=n^)

where the right hand side is the product of the ordered sequence (A t (jf i )) l6l in
E with the given total ordering on I (I, § 1, no. 2) (it suffices to argue by induc-
tion on the number of x t (assumed homogeneous) distinct from the e t ).
It remains to prove condition (iii) ; note that the mapping

(*i)i«*-»-{ e |/i(*i)»
where the right hand side is the product of the ordered sequence (/i(# t ))iei with
476



TENSOR PRODUCT RELATIVE TO COMMUTATION FACTORS § 4.7

the given total ordering on I, is A-multilinear. Then there exists one and only
one A-linear mapping/: E -&gt; F such that

(30) /(iS^O-^-

Clearly f{e) is the unit element of F and /o A, = /; to verify that /is an
algebra homomorphism, in other words that/(*)/(y) = f(xy) for x, y in E,

attention may be confined, by linearity, to the case where x = vy x t and

y = ^t/i, x { (resp. y 4 ) being homogeneous of degree a, (resp. (3j) for all i e I.
The relation to be verified then reduces, by (27), to

(n/i(*o)(0/i(yi)) = c(«, p) n vMfM).

But, taking account of relations (26), this is a consequence of Lemma 2 of
no. 6.

Clearly the algebra E and the canonical mapping &lt;J&gt; : ® Ej — &gt; E consti-

iel

tute a solution of the universal mapping problem (Set Theory, IV, § 3, no. 1),
where 2 is the species of A-algebra structure and the a-mappings 11/

from 1 1 E 4 to an A-algebra, satisfying conditions (26).

For a fixed total ordering on I, the graded algebra E defined in the proof
of Proposition 10 will be called a graded tensor z-product of type A of the family

(Ej) leI of graded algebras of type A { and will be denoted by \&gt;y E { (if no con-
fusion can arise over the ordering on I) ; similarly, the homomorphism/: E -&gt; F
defined in the proof of Proposition 10 will be denoted by 09/. The homo-

morphisms h x are called canonical. We also write E G® n when I = (1, «) and
all the E { are equal to the same algebra G.

Remarks. (1) We recover the tensor product of algebras defined in no. 1 (with
moreover the graduation the tensor product of those of its factors) taking
s j/ (a i , p y ) = 1 for all i,j, &lt;x t and $ } .

(2) Suppose that all the A ( are equal to Z and write e^ocj, fJy) = (— l) a i 6 *;

die tensor s-product yy E { corresponding to this system of commutation

factors is then called the skew tensor product of the graded algebras E t of

type Z and denoted by Ky E 4 (or E B (g) A F for two algebras, or *G® n instead

of 6 G® n ).

477



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Corollary 1. In the notation of Proposition 10, suppose further that F is a graded
A-algebra of type A and that each f is a graded algebra homomorphism relative to

&lt;j&gt;i:A{ — &gt; A; thenf = &lt;yf is a graded algebra homomorphism.
This follews immediately from the definition off and the fact that

Z, MoO = ( ai )

by definition of the (f&gt; t .

It is therefore seen that (E, &lt;\&gt;) is also a solution of another universal
mapping problem, where this time S is the species of graded A-algebra
structure of type A, the morphisms being graded algebra homomorphisms

of type A and the cc-mappings the mappings 1 1 f u where, in addition to

conditions (26), it is assumed that/j is a graded algebra homomorphism
relative to &lt;J&gt; t .

Corollary 2. Let (Ej) i6l , (F,) (eI be two finite families of A-algebras, with E (
and F 4 graded of type A,/or all i e I. For each i e I, let g t : E ( -&gt; F { be a graded algebra

homomorphism of type Aj. Then, if A i :E J -&gt; QyE t and h' t :Fi-&gt; 0$ F { are the

f G I i 6 I

canonical homomorphisms, there exists one and only one homomorphism of graded A-
algebras of type A, g: Q*&gt;) E t -&gt; Yy¥ t such that go h x = h' t o g t for all i e I. Also,
if each g { is bijective, so is g.

It suffices to apply Corollary 1 to f = h\ o g t , noting that conditions (26)
then follow from relations (25) applied to the h\.

The homomorphism defined in Corollary 2 is also denoted by Qy g t (if

no confusion can arise) ; if, for each i e I, G 4 is a third graded A-algebra of
type A, and gl:F t -» G t a graded algebra homomorphism, then

(31) ( 8 ®^)o( S ®^)= 8 ®(^°^),

as follows immediately from (30).

In the case of a skew tensor product of graded algebras of type Z, we write

Qyft instead of Oyf for homomorphisms f : E t -&gt; F t of graded algebras of

type Z; when I = {1, 2}, this homomorphism is also denoted by/ x g &lt;g&gt;f 2 ;
when I = (1, ») and all the E, (resp. F { ) are equal and all the^/J equal to the
same homomorphism^ we write g f® n .

Remark. In the proof of Proposition 10, a total ordering on I was used to
define an algebra structure on the tensor product &amp; E f of the A-modules

478



TENSOR PRODUCT RELATIVE TO COMMUTATION FACTORS § 4.7

E { . If the ordering on I is changed, another multiplicative structure arises
on £&gt; E { , but the new algebra thus obtained is canonically isomorphic to the

lei

above, since both are solutions of the same universal mapping problem. For
example, when I = {1, 2}, the canonical isomorphism of the algebra Ej e ® A E 2
onto the algebra E 2 e (g) A E x maps x x &lt;g&gt; x 2 to s 2&gt;1 (a, $)x 2 ® x lt where x 1 is
homogeneous of degree a and x 2 homogeneous of degree p.

Let J be a subset of I and, for each i e J, consider the canonical homomorph-

ism h t : E t -&gt;■ 8 Q9 E 4 = E. By virtue of relations (25) a canonical homomorphism

A:E' = E (£yE i -»E is derived canonically (by Proposition 10) from these

le J

homomorphisms, such that, for all iej, h\ = h o h { , h[ being the canonical
homomorphism E t -&gt; E\ Taking the total ordering on J induced by that
chosen on I, we obtain



a(®*,) =Ylh i (x i ) = 0x1

\ieJ 7 lei ,x *' lei



where the middle term is the product of the ordered sequence (A i (* 1 )) teJ and
where, in the right hand term, *,' = x t for i e J, x[ = e t for i $ J.

Proposition 11. ("associativity" of the tensor s-product). In the notation of
Proposition 10, let (J»)» 6 l be a partition of I and write A£ = 1 1 Aj/or all X e L.
I^f Ex fo a graded tensor z-product of type A£ of the family (Ej)^^ {for some total
ordering chosen on J x ). On the other hand, for X, \l in L fl«&lt;/ \ ^ [i, we write, for

&lt;*k = ( a l)ieJ„, Pw = (P^/eJ*.

(32) &lt; H K&gt; Pi) = le IT, J(i s tf( a i&gt; P*)-

T%«n (e X(1 ) if a jy^fem of commutation factors over the A£ zwYA oa/m in A and there
exists one and only one homomorphism of graded algebras of type A, v : jo£ E' K -&gt; £9 E i}
such that

(33) K&amp;GM-&amp;*

for all (# t ) G 1 1 E i9 provided that the total ordering is taken on I which induces on
each J K the chosen total ordering, and which is such that, for X &lt; \i in L, i ej x and

The fact that the e Xli form a system of commutation factors is trivial. Let
hi x'.E { -^-E x , h' K :E' k -&gt;*Yy E x be the canonical homomorphisms (for XeL,
i e Jx) and write hi = h'^°h u% \ it will suffice by virtue of the uniqueness of

479



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

the solution of a universal mapping problem, to show that 0$ W K and the

h\ satisfy the conditions of Proposition 10. Now, for all X e L, let/jJ:E£ -&gt; F
be the unique algebra homomorphism such that/^' °h UK = f for all i ej v
We show that, for X ^ \x, &lt;x.' K = (a,) &lt;eJfc , &amp; = 0/)iej u &gt;

(34) fi wfM) = ^k p;)/»:w^w

for x' K g E^ (resp. x'^ e E^) homogeneous of degree a£ (resp. (3£) ; it suffices,

by linearity, to verify it when *£ = Q9 *,, #^ = §9 x y , # t (resp. x y ) being

homogeneous of degree &lt;x ( (resp. (3,) in E t (resp. E y ) for iej x , iej w . But
this follows from formula (30) which defines the f' x and Lemma 3 of no. 6,
taking account of hypothesis (26) and definition (32). There is therefore one

and only one algebra homomorphism/: vy E' x -&gt; F such that/o h' K = f£ for

all X e L; whence/ o hi =/ t for all i e I and the uniqueness of/ is trivial.

8. TENSOR PRODUCT OF GRADED ALGEBRAS OF THE SAME TYPES

Assuming the hypotheses of no. 7, Proposition 10 hold, suppose further that
all the Aj are equal to the same commutative monoid A ; we can then consider on

the tensor e-product e Qy E ( the total graduation of type A , associated with the

graduation of type A = Aq on this algebra (II, § 11, no. 1); we shall call

8 QS&gt; E i} with this graduation, a graded tensor e-product of type A of the family

(Ei)iei of graded algebras of type A .

Always preserving the notation of Proposition 10 of no. 7, suppose that F is
also a graded A~algebra of type A and that the / are homomorphisms of graded

algebras of type A . Then/: vy E t -&gt; F is also a homomorphism of graded algebras

of type A : for it follows from formula (30) (no. 7) that if x t is homogeneous and

of degree &lt;x t e A , ® x x and 1 1 f{x^ are both homogeneous of degree

Z, a, e A .



It can therefore be said that E &lt;8&gt; E t , with the total graduation of type

«el

A , constitutes, together with the canonical mapping ty, a solution of a
third universal mapping problem, where 2 is the species of graded A-
algebra of type A , the morphisms are homomorphisms of graded algebras

of type A and the a-mappings are the mappings 1 if, where, in addition

to conditions (26) (of no. 7), it is assumed that each/, is a homomorphism
of graded algebras of type A .

480



TENSOR PRODUCT OF GRADED ALGEBRAS OF THE SAME TYPES § 4.8



For every subset J of I, the canonical homomorphism y9 Ej -&gt; C*) E t (no. 7)
is, in fact, a homomorphism of graded algebras of type A , as follows immedi-
ately from the above.

Proposition 12. ("associativity" of the tensor e-product of graded algebras
of the same types). With the notation of Proposition 10 of no. 7, suppose that
all the A 4 are equal to the same monoid A ; let (JOxeL be a partition of I. With the
notation of Proposition 11 of no. 7, suppose that the right hand side of formula (32)

(no. 7) depends only on the sums a£ = Z a i5 P£ = 2* P„ /or *z&gt;*ry orfifera/ /nmV

(X, [x) of distinct indices, all a x e A* and all fa e A^; let e£ w (a£, PS) tfeiwfe «fe
rigfa Aa/u/ wcfe of (32). 77k?n (e^) iy a system of commutation factors over the family
(Ax) X 6L&gt; where A£ = A /or all XeL.IfElisthe graded tensor e-product of type
A of the family (E,) leJx , there exists one and only one isomorphism of graded algebras

of type A , w: 6 "® E£ -&gt; £ ® E„ such that

j vr u&gt; X6lj a. JeI «

provided that total orderings are chosen on the J K and on I as described in no. 7,
Proposition 11.

By the hypothesis, for y, 8 in A , s^(y, 8) = e io y (y, 8) for some i e] K
and some j e J w , as is seen by considering the elements cc' K = (a f ) i6Jx and
&amp; = (Pi)isj B such that a, = y, a { = for i # * , p, = 8, p y = for; ^ j ;
it follows immediately that the e^ form a system of commutation factors. The
rest of the proof is then analogous to that of Proposition 1 1 (no. 7) and is
left to the reader.

Note that the additional hypotheses of Proposition 12 are fulfilled when
A = Z and that (s w ) is, either the trivial system of factors (ey(a,, P,) = 1
for all i,j), or the system of factors defined by e w (a t , p,) = (-1)«A; in the
latter case, the right hand side of formula (32) is equal to (-1) Y , where



= 2 &lt;x,p, = (2 a,)(2 PJ.



Remarks. (1) Let I be an infinite indexing set and A a commutative monoid;
let (A,) i6l denote the family such that A, = A for all i and suppose given for
every ordered pair of distinct indices (i,j) of I a mapping s w :A, x A y -»A
satisfying conditions (22), (23) and (24) (no. 7) ; this will also be called
a system of commutation factors over the family (A 4 ). Consider a family (Ej)^
of graded A-algebras of type A ; for each finite subset J of I, let Ej
denote a graded tensor e-product of type A of the subfamily (E,) ieJ (with an
arbitrary choice of a total ordering on J). If J, J' are two finite subsets of I
such that J c J' ( a canonical homomorphism of graded algebras of type A ,

481



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

hjj'.Ej -&gt; Ej', has been defined above and the uniqueness properties of these
homomorphisms show immediately that if J cj' c= J" are three finite subsets
of I, then hj"j = hyy o hj'j. Thus there is a direct system (E J} hjj) of graded
algebras of type A (§ 3, no. 3), whose indexing set is the right directed set
5(1) of finite subsets of I. The graded algebra of type A , the direct limit of
this direct system (§ 3, no. 3), is called a graded tensor e-product of type A of

the family (E f ) ieI ; it is also denoted by (*y E 4 . When all the A 4 are equal to
Z and e t j(a u $j) = ( — l) a « B ', the tensor product Qy E 4 is also called the skew

tensor product of the family (Ej) JeI and is denoted by vy E 4 . We leave to

the reader the task of formulating and proving the proposition which generalizes
Proposition 10 of no. 7 to the case where I is infinite, as Proposition 8 of
no. 5 generalizes Proposition 5 of no. 2 to the case where I is infinite. Note

that the underlying A-module of Qy E t is the same as that underlying the

(non-graded) tensor product of the family (E 4 ) t6l of non-graded algebras
defined in no. 5.

(2) Let E be a graded A-algebra of type A (where A is a commutative
monoid) and p:A-&gt;B a ring homomorphism; the graduation on p*(E) (II,
§ 11, no. 5) is identical with the graduation on the graded tensor product
B ® A E, where B has the trivial graduation.

9. ANTICOMMUTATIVE ALGEBRAS AND ALTERNATING ALGEBRAS

Definition 7. A graded A-algebra E of type Z is called anticommutative if for all
non-zero homogeneous elements x,yofFi

■ (36) xy = ( - 1 ) *w&lt;*»*(Jtye.

The algebra E is called alternating if it is anticommutative and also x 2 = for every
homogeneous element xeE of odd degree.

Remarks. (1) Let E + be the graded subalgebra of E the direct sum of the
E 2n (neZ); it follows from Definition 7 that if E is anticommutative, E +
is a subalgebra contained in the centre o/"E (and hence commutative).

(2) Suppose that 2 is not a divisor of in E; then if E is anticommutative
E is alternating, since for xe E homogeneous and of odd degree, x 2 = —x 2
by (36), whence 2x 2 = and x 2 = by virtue of the hypothesis.

(3) We shall study in detail in § 7 important examples of alternating alge-
bras.

Lemma 4. Let E be a graded algebra of type Z and S a set of homogeneous elements
#0; the set F of elements of*E* all of whose homogeneous components x =£ satisfy
relation (36) for ally eS is a graded subalgebra o/"E.

482



ANTICOMMUTATIVE ALGEBRAS AND ALTERNATING ALGEBRAS § 4.9

It suffices to note that: (1) if*', x" are two homogeneous elements of the
same degree p, y a homogeneous element of degree q and x'y = ( — l) pq yx',
x"y = {-\)™yx", then also (*' + x")y = (-l)™y{x' + x"); (2) if a;', x" are
two homogeneous elements of respective degrees p', p", y a homogeneous
element of degree q and x'y = (~l) p ' Q yx', x"y = (- l) p " q yx", then

(x'x")y = (-l)&lt;*' + ""fy(*V).

Proposition 13. Let E be a graded A-algebra of type Z and S a generating system
of the algebra E consisting of homogeneous elements ^0;for E to be anticommutative
(resp. alternating), it is necessary and sufficient that (36) hold for all x g S and yeS
(resp. fAfl* this condition hold and further that x 2 = Ofor all x homogeneous of odd
degree belonging to S).

We consider first the case of anticommutative algebras. By Lemma 4, the
subalgebra F consisting of the elements all of whose homogeneous com-
ponents x ^ satisfy (36) for all y eS, contains all the elements of S and
hence F = E. If now F' is similarly the subalgebra of E consisting of the ele-
ments all of whose homogeneous components x ^ satisfy (36) for every
homogeneous element y ^ 0, it follows from the above that F' contains all
the elements of S and hence F' = E, which completes the proof of the proposi-
tion in this case.

To prove the proposition in the case of alternating algebras, it can be as-
sumed that E is already anticommutative; it is then immediate that every

homogeneous element of odd degree in E is of the form 2* zfa, where z x e E +
and #j e S is of odd degree (using the fact that E + is contained in the centre
of E); it follows that (z, z % x\ = 2, zfxf + Z., z^x^j + *,.*,) = since
xf = by hypothesis and #,*, + XjX t = by (36).

Proposition 14. Let E and F be two graded A-algebras of type Z, both anticom-
mutative (resp. alternating). Then the skew tensor product E*&lt;g) A F (no. 7) is an
anticommutative (resp. alternating) algebra.

A generating system of E *&lt;g) A F consists of the x ® y, where x (resp. y)
is a homogeneous element ^0 of E (resp. F). Consider two such elements
x &lt;g&gt;y, *' ®y', with deg(x) = p, deg(y) = q, deg(*') = p', deg(y') = q', so
that x &lt;g) y is of degree/* + q and x' (g) y' of degree/*' + q'. Then by definition
(no. 7, formula (27)) and by virtue of (36),

(x ®y)(*' &lt;g&gt;y') = (-iy p '(xx') ® (yy')

(x f ®y')(x ® y ) = (-i)^'(^) ® Wy)

- (-1)p«'+pp' + ««'(**') {yy')

and the criterion of Proposition 13 shows that E B (g) A F is anticommutative
since pq' + pp' + qq' - qp' = (p + q)(p' + q') (mod. 2). If further E and F

483



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

are alternating and p + q is odd, one of the numbers p, q is necessarily odd,
hence (x &lt;g&gt;y) 2 = ± (x 2 ) &lt;g&gt; (y 2 ) = and Proposition 13 shows that E B &lt;g) A F
is alternating.

Corollary. Let E be an anticommutative (resp. alternating) graded A-algebra of
type Z. Then for every ring homomorphism p:A-&gt;B, the graded B-algebra p*(E)
(no. 8, Remark 2) is anticommutative (resp. alternating) .

The ring B with the trivial graduation can be considered as an alternating
A-algebra and p*(E) = E 8 ® A B, hence Proposition 14 can be applied.

Remark. Let E be an anticommutative graded A-algebra of type Z. Then
the A-linear mapping of E ® A E into E denned by multiplication of E (§1,
no. 3) is a homomorphism of the graded A-algebra E g ® A E into E, for in the
notation of Proposition 14, in the algebra E,

(xy)(x'y') = (- !)"»•(** W).



§ 5. TENSOR ALGEBRA, TENSORS

1. DEFINITION OF THE TENSOR ALGEBRA OF A MODULE

Let A be a commutative ring and M an A-module. For every integer n ^ 0,
the A-module the tensor product of n modules equal to M (also called the
n-th tensor power of M) is denoted by (g) n M, or M® n , or T n (M), or T A (M), or
Tens n (M); then T 1 (M) = M; also we write T°(M) = A. The A-module the

direct sum © T n (M) is denoted by T(M) or Tens(M). We shall define a

graded A-algebra structure of type N on T(M), by defining for every ordered
pair of integers^ ^ 0, q ^ 0, an A-linear mapping

m pq :T*(M) (g) A T«(M) -^P&gt; + «(M)

(§ 3, no. 1, Remark). Forp &gt; and q &gt; 0, m pq is the associativity isomorphism
(II, § 3, no. 9) and, whenp = (resp. q = 0), m Qq is the canonical isomor-
phism of A A T a (M) onto "P(M) (resp. m p0 is the canonical isomorphism
of T P (M) &lt;g&gt; A A onto T P (M) (II, § 3, no. 4, Proposition 4). Then, for x, e M,

a 6 A,

{(*! ® • • • ® *„) • (*p + l ® • • • ® x p+q )
= x x ® • • • ® x p x p + x &lt;g) • • • ® x p+q
a. (xj ® • • • &lt;g) x p ) = afo ® • • • ® x p ).

It is immediate that the multiplication thus defined on T(M) is associative
and admits as unit element the unit element 1 of A = T°(M).

484



FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES OF THE TENSOR ALGEBRA § 5.2

Definition 1. For every module M over a commutative ring A, the tensor algebra of
M, denoted by T(M), or Tens(M), or T A (M), is the algebra © T n (M) with the

n&gt;0 v '
multiplication defined in (1). The canonical injection &lt;f&gt;:"P(M) -&gt;T(M) (II, §1,
no. 12) (also denoted by (f&gt; M ) is called the canonical injection o/M into T(M).

Proposition 1. Let E be a (unital) A-algebra andf:M-&gt; E an A-linear mapping.
There exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism g:T(M)-&gt;E such that

In other words, (T(M), (J&gt;) is a solution of the universal mapping problem
(Set Theory, IV, § 3, no. 1), where S is the species of A-algebra structure,
the a-mappings being the A-linear mappings from the module M to an
A-algebra. Observe that here there is no question of a graduation on T(M).

For every finite family (*,)i &lt;1&lt;n of n elements of M, by definition of the
product in T(M), x ± ® x 2 &lt;g&gt; • • • ® x n = &lt;|&gt;(*i)&lt;K*2) • • • &lt;K*»); then neces-
sarily g(x x &lt;g&gt; * 2 ® • • • &lt;g&gt; x n ) = f(x 1 )f(x 2 ) . . .f(x n ) for n ^ 1 and g(a.) = ae
(if e is the unit element of E) for a e A, which proves the uniqueness of g.
Conversely, note that, for all n &gt; 0, the mapping

(*!, . . ., * n ) ^/(xjffa) . . .f(x n )

of M n into E is A-multilinear; hence there corresponds to it an A-linear
mapping g n :T B (M) -&gt; E such that

(2) g(x x (8) x 2 &lt;8) • • • &lt;g&gt; x n ) = f{ Xl )f(x 2 ) . . . f{x n ).

Also we define the mapping £ :T°(M)-&gt;E as equal to r) E (§1, no. 3),
in other words g (cc) = cce for a e A. Let g be the unique A-linear mapping
of T(M) into E whose restriction to T n (M) is £ n (n ^ 0); it is immediate
that g o (j&gt; = g x =zf and it remains to verify that g is an A-algebra homo-
morphism. By construction g(l) = e and it suffices by linearity to show that
g(uv) = g(u)g(v) for ueT p (M) and veT« (M) (p &gt; 0, q &gt; 0); now it follows
from formulae (1) and (2) that this relation is true when u = x x &lt;g) x 2 ® • • • x p
and vex p + 1 &lt;g&gt; ••• &lt;g&gt; x p+q (where the x t belong to E). It is therefore true
for u e T P (M) and v e T a (M) by linearity.

Remark. Suppose that E is a graded A-algebra of type Z, with graduation
(E n ), and suppose also that

(3) /(M) cz E ± .

Then it follows from (2) that £(T P (M)) c E p for all p ^ and hence g is a
graded algebra homomorphism.

2. FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES OF THE TENSOR ALGEBRA

Proposition 2. Let Abe a commutative ring, M and N two A-modules and

m:M-&gt;N

485



Ill



TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS



an A-linear mapping. There exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism

w':T(M)-&gt;T(N)
such that the diagram

M — u —&gt; N



&lt;!&gt;M



&lt;1&gt;n



T(M) — 7* T(N)

is commutative. Further, u' is a graded algebra homomorphism.

The existence and uniqueness of u' follow from no. 1, Proposition 1, applied
to the algebra T(N) and the linear mapping (j&gt; N o u : M -&gt;- T(N) ; as

«(M) «= "P(N) = N,

the fact that u' is a graded algebra homomorphism follows from the Remark
of no. 1.

The homomorphism u' of Proposition 2 will henceforth be denoted by T(u).
If P is an A-module and z&gt;:N -» P an A-linear mapping, then

(4) T(v o u) = T(») o T(«)

for T(y) o T(w) is an algebra homomorphism rendering commutative the dia-
gram

V o U

M &gt; P

&lt;t&gt;p
T(M) ► T(P)

T(u) is sometimes called the canonical extension of u to T(M) (which contains
M = T^M)). Note that the restriction T n (w):T n (M) -&gt;T n (N) is just the
linear mapping u® n = u ® u (g) • • • ®«(« times), for

T n (w) (x x ® • • • &lt;g&gt; x n ) = u(xj) ® u(x n )

since T(u) is an algebra homomorphism and T 1 (w) = u; the restriction T°(w)
to A is the identity mapping. T n (u) is called the n-th tensor power of u.

Proposition 3. If «:M-&gt;N z.y a surjective A-linear mapping, the homomorphism
T(m):T(M) -»T(N) is surjective and its kernel is the two-sided ideal of T(M)
generated by the kernel P c: M &lt;= T(M) ofu.

T°(u) :T°(M) -&gt; T°(N) is bijective and for every integer n &gt; 0,

T n ( M ):T n (M)-&gt;T n (N)



486



FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES OF THE TENSOR ALGEBRA § 5.2

is surjective, as is seen by induction on n using II, § 3, no. 6, Proposition 6;
the latter proposition also shows, by induction on n, that the kernel 3 n of
T n (w) is the submodule of T n (M) generated by the products

*i ® x 2 • • • &lt;g) x n

where at least one of the x t belongs to P. This shows that the kernel 3 = ©^ 3„
of T(«) is the two-sided ideal generated by P in T(M).

If u:M -&gt; N is an injective linear mapping, it is not always true that l{u)
is an injective mapping (Exercise 1). However, this is true when u is an injec-
tion such that a(M) is a direct factor of N, for then there exists a linear mapping
v:N -&gt; M such that v o u is the identity mapping on M and therefore

T(o o u ) = T(v) o T(«)

is the identity mapping on T(M), hence T(«) is injective and its image (iso-
morphic to T(M)) is a direct factor of T(N) (II, § 1, no. 9, Proposition 15).
More precisely:

Proposition 4. Let N and P be two submodules of an A-module M such that their
sum N + Pita direct factor in M and their intersection NnPtsa direct factor in
N and in P. Then the homomorphisms T(N) -^ T(M), T(P) -&gt; T(M) and

T(NnP)^T(M),

canonical extensions of the canonical injections, are injective; if T(N), T(P) and
T(N n P) are identified with subalgebras of T(M) by means of these homomorphisms ,
then

(5) T(NnP) =T(N)nT(P).

By hypothesis, there exist submodules N' &lt;= N and P' c P such that

N = N' © (N n P), P = P' © (N n P) ; then

N + P = N'©P'©(NnP)

and there exists by hypothesis a submodule M' of M such that

M = M'©(N + P)=M'©N'8P'©(NnP)

= M' © P' © N = M' © N' © P.

In particular, N + P, N, P and N n P are direct factors in M, which im-
plies, as has been seen above, that the canonical homomorphisms

T(N + P) -► T(M), T(N) -^ T(M),
T(P) -&gt; T(M), T(N n P) -&gt; T(M)

are injective. The three algebras T(N), T(P) and T(N n P) are thus identi-
fied with subalgebras of T(N + P) and the latter with a subalgebra of T(M) ;

487



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

writing Q=NnP, it remains to show that, if T(QJ, T(N' © Q,) and
T(P' © Q,) are identified with subalgebras of T(N' © P' © Q,), then

(6) T(N' © Q) n T(P' © Q,) = T(Q,).

Now, consider the commutative diagram

N'©Q, — &gt;N'©P'©Q,

I 1

o, &gt; p'©q.

where the horizontal arrows are the canonical injections and the vertical
arrows the canonical projections. We derive a commutative diagram

T(N' © Q,) -^&gt; T(N' © P' © Q)

(7)

T(Q) ► T(P'0Q)

V

where r and s are surjective homomorphisms (Proposition 3) and u and v
injective homomorphisms. Hence, to prove (6), note that the right hand
side is obviously contained in the left; it therefore suffices to verify that if

*eT(N'©Q,)nT(P'©Q,),

then #eT(QJ. Now the definition of the homomorphism s shows that its
restriction to T(P' © Q,) (identified with a subalgebra of T(N' © P' © Q,)
is the identity mapping; the hypothesis on x therefore implies that s(u(x)) = x.
But then also v(r(x)) = x, in other words x belongs to the image of T(Q) in
T(P' © Q), which was to be proved.

Remark. Note in particular that the hypotheses of Proposition 4 always hold
for arbitrary submodules N, P of M when A is afield (II, § 7, no. 3, Proposi-
tion 4). Moreover, if N c= P and N ^ P, then T n (N) ^ T n (P) for all n ^ 1,
since if R is a complement of P in N, then T n (P) n T n (R) = {0} by (4) and
T*(R) * {0}.

Corollary. Let K be a commutative field and M a vector space over K. For every
element zeT(M), there exists a smallest vector space No/M such that zeT(N)
and N is of finite rank over K.

It is understood in this statement that for every vector subspace P of M,
T(P) is canonically identified with a subalgebra of T(M). Let zeT(M); z
can be expressed as a linear combination of elements each of which is a finite
product of elements of M = T X (M) ; all the elements of M which occur in
these products generate a vector subspace Q, of finite rank and zeT(Q).

488



EXTENSION OF THE RING OF SCALARS § 5.3

Let ft be the (non-empty) set of vector subspaces P of finite rank such that
z e T(P). Every decreasing sequence of elements of ft is stationary, since they
are vector spaces of finite rank. Hence ft has a minimal element N (Set Theory,
III, §6, no. 5). It remains to verify that every Peft contains N; now,
z e T(P) n T(N) = T(P n N) (Proposition 4) ; in view of the definition of N,
this implies NnP = N, that is P =&gt; N.

The subspace N of M is said to be associated with z.

3. EXTENSION OF THE RING OF SCALARS

Let A, A' be two commutative rings and p:A-&gt;-A' a ring homomorphism.
Let M be an A-module, M' an A'-module and m:M -&gt; M' an A-homomorph-
ism; as the canonical injection (j&gt; M / : M' -&gt; T A ,(M') is also an A-homomorphism

(by restriction of scalars), so is the composition M -&gt; M' &gt; T A ,(M'). An

A-algebra homomorphism T A (M) -&gt; p*(T A -(M')) is derived (no. 2), also de-
noted by T(u) : T A (M) -^- T A .(M'), which is the unique A-homomorphism ren-
dering commutative the diagram

M — ■* M'

(8) * M |

T A (M) -^&gt; T A .(M')

If a:A'-&gt;A" is a commutative ring homomorphism, M" an A"-module
and z&gt;:M'-&gt;M" an A'-homomorphism, the above uniqueness property
shows that

(9) T(vou) =T{v)oJ(u).

Proposition 5. Let A, B be two commutative rings, p: A -&gt; B a ring homomorphism
and M an A-module. The canonical extension

4,:T B (B(g) A M)-&gt;B&lt;g) A T A (M)

of the B-linear mapping 1 B ^&gt; M :B &lt;g) A M -&gt; B ® A T A (M) is an isomorphism of
graded B-algebras.

Consider the two A-algebra homomorphisms: the canonical injection
j :B = T°(B ® A M) -+ T(B ® A M) and the homomorphism

A = T(i):T(M)^T(B® A M)

derived (cf. formula (8)) from the canonical A-linear mapping

i:M-+B ® A M.

489



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

As T°(B ® A M) is contained in the centre of T(B ® A M), Proposition 5 of
§ 4, no. 2 can be applied and an A-algebra homomorphism

&lt;|/:B® A T(M)-*T(B® A M)

is obtained such that, for (3 e B, x t e M for 1 ^ i ^ n,

&lt;K(P &lt;8&gt; (*i &lt;8&gt; x 2 &lt;g&gt; • • • *„)) = PCC 1 ® *i) ® C 1 ® *a) ® • • • &lt;S&gt; (1 &lt;8&gt; *„))&gt;

which shows immediately that i|/ is also a B-algebra homomorphism. It
suffices to prove that ^ o &lt;]/ and &lt;]/ o ty are the identity mappings on B ® A T(M)
and T(B ® A M) respectively. Now, these two algebras are generated by
B (g) A M and clearly ip o &lt;p' and &lt;p' o &lt;p coincide with the identity mapping on
B A M, whence the conclusion.

4. DIRECT LIMIT OF TENSOR ALGEBRAS

Let (A a , &lt;J&gt; Ba ) be a directed direct system of commutative rings and (M a ,/ 3a )
a direct system of A a -modules (II, § 6, no. 2) ; let A = lim A a and M = lim M a ,

which is an A-module. For a ^ (J an A a -algebra homomorphism (no. 3,
formula (8)) //„ = T(/ Pa ) : T Aa (M a ) -» T AiS (M B ) is derived canonically from
the A a -homomorphism/ Pa : M a -&gt;M P and it follows from (9) (no. 3) that
(T Aa (M a ),/^ a ) is a direct system of k^-algebras. On the other hand let/ a : M a -&gt; M
be the canonical Aa-homomorphism; an A a -algebra homomorphism
fa'- T A «(M a ) -&gt; T A (M) is derived (no. 3, formula (8)) and it also follows from
(9) (no. 3) that the/ a ' constitute a direct system of A a -homomorphisms.

Proposition 6. The A-homomorphism f = lim/^ : lim T Aa (M a ) -&gt; T A (M) is
a graded algebra isomorphism.
To simplify we write E = T A (M) and E' = lim T Aa (M a ) and let

^T^MJ^E'
be the canonical A^-homomorphism. Clearly the composite A a -linear map-
pings M a — %■ T Aa (M a ) — ^» E' form a direct system and there is therefore
one and only one A-linear mapping u = lim(g a o &lt;J) M J :M -&gt; E' such that



« °/a = £a ° &lt;f&gt;



M«



for all a. This mapping itself factorizes uniquely (no. 1, Proposition 1) into

M — ^&gt; E -&gt; E', where h is an A-algebra homomorphism. It will suffice to
prove that h °f = 1 E ' and/' ° h = 1 E .

To this end note that, for every index a, (no. 3, formula (8))

h °f* © &lt;i&gt;M« = h o &lt;J&gt; M o/ B = u of a = ga o &lt;p Ma
490



TENSOR ALGEBRA OF A DIRECT SUM, A FREE MODULE AND A GRADED MODULE § 5.5

whence, by the uniqueness assertion of no. 1, Proposition 1,

h o/ B ' = g«

for all a; it follows that (h of) ° g a = g a for all a and hence hof = 1 E , by
definition of a direct limit.

On the other hand, by virtue of no. 3, formula (8),

whence again/' o u = &lt;j&gt; M by definition of a direct limit; we conclude that
/'oAo(j) M = (|) M and the uniqueness property of no. 1, Proposition 1 gives

/' o h = 1 E .

Proposition 6 can also be shown by observing that, for every integer
n &gt; 1, there is a canonical A-module isomorphism lim T£ a (M a ) —&gt; T£(M),

as follows by induction on n from II, § 6, no. 3, Proposition 7. It is immedi-
ately verified that these isomorphisms are the restrictions of/'.

5. TENSOR ALGEBRA OF A DIRECT SUM. TENSOR ALGEBRA OF A FREE
MODULE. TENSOR ALGEBRA OF A GRADED MODULE

Let A be a commutative ring and M = © M x the direct sum of a family of

A-modules. It follows from II, § 3, no. 7, Proposition 7, by induction on n,
that T n (M) is the direct sum of the submodules the images of the canonical
injections

M M ® M x 2 ® ' • • ® M„ n -&gt;T*(M) = M®»

relative to all the sequences (X { ) e L B . Identifying M Kl &lt;g) M Xa ® • • • (g) M Kn
with this image, it is seen that T(M) is the direct sum of all the modules

M M (8) M X2 ® • • • M^

where n runs through N and, for each n, (Xj) runs through L n .
We first deduce the following consequence:

Theorem 1. Let A be a commutative ring, M a free A-module and (e K ) KeJj a basis
of M. Then the elements e s = e Xx ® e^ ® • • • ® e Xn , where s = (X l5 . . . , X„)
runs through the set of all finite sequences of elements ofL and e is used to denote the
unit element of T(M), form a basis of the A-module T(M).

The elements of this basis are obviously homogeneous and the multiplica-
tion table is given by

( 10 ) e s e t = e st

where st denotes the sequence of elements of L obtained by juxtaposing the
sequences s and t (I, § 7, no. 2).

491



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

It is seen that the basis (* s ) of T(M), with the multiplicative law (10), is
canonically isomorphic to the free monoid of the set L (I, § 7, no. 2), the iso-
morphism being obtained by mapping each word s of this monoid to the
element e s . It follows (§ 2, no. 7) that the tensor algebra T(M) of a free module M,
with a basis of indexing set L, is canonically isomorphic to the free associative algebra
of L over A. In particular (§2, no. 7, Proposition 7), for every mapping
/: L -&gt; E from L to an A-algebra E, there exists one and only one A-algebra
homomorphism/: T(M) -&gt; E such thatf(e K ) =/(a).

Remark. The above results can equally be obtained as a consequence of the
universal properties of the free associative algebra of the tensor algebra, using
II, § 3, no. 7, Corollary 2 to Proposition 7.

Corollary. If Mis a projective A-module, T(M) is a projective A-module.

M is a direct factor of a free A-module N (II, § 2, no. 2, Proposition 4)
and hence T(M) is a direct factor of T(N) (no. 2) ; as T(N) is free (Theorem
1), this shows that T(M) is projective (II, § 2, no. 2).

Proposition 7. Let A be a commutative monoid, M a graded A-module of type A
and (M^eA its graduation. For every ordered pair (a, n) eA x N, let T a » n (M)
be the {direct) sum of the submodules M ai &lt;g) M a2 &lt;g) • • • &lt;g) M a „ of T n (M) such

n

that Iai = a; then (T a ' n (M)) (a&gt;n)eAxN is the only graduation of type A x N
compatible with the algebra structure on T(M) and inducing on M = T 1 (M) the
given gradation.

It has been seen at the beginning of this no. that T(M) is the direct sum of
the T a « n (M) and the fact that this is a graduation compatible with the algebra
structure follows immediately from the definitions. If (T' a,n ) is another
graduation of type A x N on T(M) compatible with the algebra structure
and such that T^^M) = T'"' 1 for &lt;xeA, it follows immediately from the
definitions that, for all n ^ 1 and all a e A, T a ' n (M) c T' a ' n ; but since T(M)
is also the direct sum of the T a - n (M), this implies that T' a,n = T a - n (M)
(II, § 1, no. 8, Remark).

6. TENSORS AND TENSOR NOTATION

Let A be a commutative ring, M an A-module, M* the dual of M (II, § 2,
no. 3) and I and J two disjoint finite sets; the A-module y9 E„ where E t = M
if i e I, E ( = M* if i e J, is denoted by Tj(M) ; the elements of Tj(M) are
called tensors of type (I, J) over M. They are called contravariant if J = 0,
covariant if I = and mixed otherwise.

Let I', I" be two subsets of I and J', J" two subsets of J such that I'Ul' = I,

492



TENSORS AND TENSOR NOTATION § 5.6

I' n T = 0, J' u y = J, J' n J" = ; then there is a canonical associa-
tivity isomorphism (II, § 3, no. 9)

(11) Tj(M)-&gt;Tj:(M)(g) A Tj:(M).

Considering the tensor algebra T(M © M*), it follows from no. 5 that
T n (M © M*) is canonically identified with the direct sum of the Tj(M)
where I runs through the set of subsets of the interval (1, n) of N and J is the
complement of I in (1, ra).

When I = (l,/&gt;) and J = (/&gt; + \,p + q) with integers p ^ 0, q ^
(where we replace I (resp. J) by when/* = (resp. q = 0)), the A-module
Tj(M) is also denoted by T£(M) ; the A-modules TS(M) and T°(M) are there-
fore by definition the A-modules T n (M) and T n (M*) respectively. When I
and J are arbitrary finite sets of cardinals p = Card (I) and q = Card (J),
we give each of them a total ordering; then there exists an increasing bijec-
tion of I (resp. J) onto (l,/&gt;) (resp. (/&gt; + l,/&gt; + q\ and these bisections there-
fore define an isomorphism

T*(M)-&gt;T a p (M).

When M is a finitely generated projective A-module, it follows from II, § 2,
no. 7, Corollary 4 to Proposition 13 and II, § 4, no. 4, Corollary 1 to Proposi-
tion 4 that there is a canonical isomorphism

(T*(M))*-&gt;T?(M).

Suppose now that M is a. finitely generated free A-module and let {e K ) KeLl be
a basis of M (L therefore being a finite set). The basis of M* dual to (* x ) (II,
§ 2, no. 6) is denoted by (« A, ) X6L . The bases («? x ) and (e k ) of M and M* respec-
tively define (no. 5) a basis of Tj(M), which we give explicitly as follows:

given two mappings/: I -&gt; L and g: J -&gt; L, let ej be the element ® x t of

Tj(M) defined by

Xi = e m iff el, x t = e 9li) ifzej.

When (f,g) runs through the set of ordered pairs of mappings/: I -^-L and
£:J-&gt;L, the e' form a basis of the A-module Tj(M), said to be associated
with the given basis (e K ) of M. For z e T$(M), we can therefore write

(12) z = ( 2o4(zM

where the a ff are the coordinate forms relative to the basis (ef) ; by an abuse
of language, the &lt;x£(z) are called the coordinates of the tensor z with respect
to the basis (e K ) of die module M. The &lt;x£ constitute the dual basis of (/ g ), in
other words they are identified with the elements of the basis of T"i(M),
associated with (e x ). When I and J are complementary subsets of an interval
(1, n) of N, cc f g (or a£(z)) is denoted as follows: each element /(i) for i e I is

493



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

written as an upper index in the i-th place with a dot in the i-th place for
i e J; similarly, g(i) for i e J is written as a lower index in the z-th place with
a dot in the i-th place for i e I. For example, for I = {1, 4}, J = {2, 3}, we
write a^ p ? if/(l) = X,/(4) = jx, g(2) = v, g(3) = p.

Let (&lt;\)xeL be another basis of M and P the matrix of passing from (e k )
to (e k ) (II, § 10, no. 8). Then the matrix of passing from («**) to («*■) (dual
basis of (e K )) is the contragredient t P~ 1 of P (II, § 10, no. 8, Proposition 5).
It follows (II, § 10, no. 10) that the matrix of passing from the basis (e 3 /) of
TJ(M) to the basis ffi) (where/ (resp. g) runs through the set of mappings
of I into L (resp. of J into L)) is the matrix

(13) ® Q„ whereQ f = PifieI, Q, = 'P" 1 if iej.
The transpose of this matrix is therefore identified with

(14) ® i? i5 where P ( = f P' x if t e I, /?, = P if i e J.

leluJ

Suppose now that M is an arbitrary module. Let iel, jej and write
I' = I — {*'}, J' = J — {j}; we shall define a canonical A-linear mapping

«}:TJ(M)-&gt;TJ.(M),

called contraction of the index i and the index j. For this, note that the mapping of
M 1 x (M*) J , which associates with every family (x t ) leluJt where *,eM if
i g I and x x e M* if i e J, the element

(15) &lt;*i,*y&gt; ® ^fc

of Tj'(M), is A-multilinear; c) is the corresponding A-linear mapping.

Suppose now that M is free and finitely generated and let (e K ) Kell be a basis
of M. Given two mappings/: I -&gt; L, g: J -&gt; L, let/ denote the restriction of
/to I' = I — {*'} and g } the restriction of g to J' = J — {j}; then by virtue of
(12)

(16) "^-i-R if/(0=.(i)

The expression for the coordinates of c*(z) as a function of those of z is ob-
tained ; for every mapping/' (resp. g') of I' into L (resp. of J' into L) and every
X e L, let (/', X) (resp. (g', X)) denote the mapping of I into L (resp. of J into L)
whose restriction to I' (resp. J') is/' (resp. g') and which takes the value X
at the element i (resp. j). Then, if the coordinate forms relative to the basis
(e 9 f ') of Tj'(M) are denoted by pj',

(17) Pf(«JW)«^*':S(2).

494



TENSORS AND TENSOR NOTATION § 5.6

Examples of tensors. (1) Let M be a. finitely generated projective A-module. We know
(II, § 4, no. 2, Corollary to Proposition 2), that there is a canonical A-module
isomorphism

M :M*® A M-&gt;End A (M)

such that M (** &lt;g&gt; x) (for x e M, x* e M*) is the endomorphism

y •"&gt; &lt;y, **&gt;*•

Hence, by means of 8 M , T{?}(M) (isomorphic to Tj(M)) can be identified with
the A-module End A (M). Suppose that M is a free module and let (e K ) Xelj be
a basis of M; then the coordinates of a tensor z e M* &lt;g&gt; M relative to the
basis (e u ® e K ) of this module are denoted by ^\ As Q u (e" &lt;g&gt; e K ) is the endo-
morphism y i-&gt; &lt;y, e u &gt;^, the endomorphism u = M (z) = 0m( ^&lt; £ii^ ® e \)
mapsy to 2* £^&lt;y, « w &gt;*\&gt; writing y = ^, we obtain the relation

(18) «W=|^

l&amp; € Li

in other words, the matrix of the linear mapping u = 8 M (z) w fAa£ wAore element in the
row of index \x and column of index X is ^.

The definition of the trace of u (II, § 4, no. 3) shows immediately that

Tr(0 M (z)) = cl(z).

Therefore the element z = 2-, e K (g&gt; e K (whose coordinates ^ are zero for

X # (x and equal to 1 for X = fx), which is such that M (z o ) = 1 M , is the image
of the element 1 e A = T°(M) under the mapping the transpose of the contraction

*T18(M)-A.

(2) Suppose always that M is a. finitely generated projective A-module; there is a
canonical A-module isomorphism

(x: M* ® A M* -&gt; (M ® A M)*

(II, § 4, no. 4, Corollary 1 to Proposition 2) and a canonical isomorphism

0: (M ® A M)* &lt;S) A M -&gt; Hom A (M &lt;g&gt; A M, M)

(II, § 4, no. 2, Corollary to Proposition 2) ; also Hom A (M ® A M, M) is
canonically isomorphic to the A-module J2? 2 (M, M; M) ofA-bilinear mappings
of M x M into M (II, § 3, no. 9). Composing these isomorphisms, a canonical
isomorphism is obtained

Xm : T[f; a} (M) = M* ® M* &lt;g&gt; M -* jg? a (M, M; M)

495



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

such that, for x*,y* in M*, zeM, Xm(** &lt;S&gt;#* &lt;8&gt; z) is the bilinear mapping

(u,v) ^&lt;u,x*y(v,y*}z.

Hence, by means of Xm&gt; TuJ 2 &gt;(M) (isomorphic to Ti^M)) can be identified
with the A-module SC 2 (M, M; M). Suppose that M is a free A-module and let
(*x)*.eL be a basis of M; then the coordinates of a tensor z e M* &lt;g) M* ® M
relative to the basis (e K &lt;g&gt; e» &lt;g) e y ) of this module are denoted by Q^. The bi-
linear mapping Xm( 2 ) maps the ordered pair (e K , e„) to

veL

and therefore the XJ^. are just the constants of structure of the (in general non-
associative) algebra defined on M by the bilinear mapping Xm( z )&gt; with respect
to the basis (e K ) (§ 1, no. 7).

Remark 2. Let (^)xeLj (*\)\eL be two bases of M and P the matrix of passage
from (e K ) to (e^). On account of what was seen in Example 1, the element of P
appearing in the row of index X and the column of index [x is denoted by aft
and the element of the contragredient l P~ x appearing in the row of index X
and the column of index jx is denoted by f*£. Then (in the notation introduced
above)



(19)



^ = 2 $e K



for all mappings f : I -&gt; L and g' : J -&gt; L. The coordinates ^ of a tensor
z e Tj(M) with respect to the basis (e K ) can therefore be expressed in terms of
the coordinates Xj? of z with respect to the basis (e K ) using the formulae

The matrix P ~ 1 of passage from the basis (e K ) to the basis (e K ) is the trans-
pose of *P ~ x , so that p" is the element which appears in the column of index
X and the row of index fx of P -1 . The calculation of tf in terms of the e 9 r and
that of the X£. in terms of the X/ g are therefore made by replacing a£ by p£ and
(}£ by a* in the above calculations and exchanging the roles of/and/' and those
of g and g'. Then

496



DEFINITION OF THE SYMMETRIC ALGEBRA OF A MODULE §6.1

CT -tf=l(n«?8,)(0«)«-

The above formulae are such that the summation is over indices which appear
once as a lower index and once as an upper index. Certain authors allow them-
selves because of this circumstance to suppress the summation signs.



§ 6. SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

1. DEFINITION OF THE SYMMETRIC ALGEBRA OF A MODULE

Definition 1. Let A be a commutative ring and M an A-module. The symmetric
algebra ofM, denoted by S(M), or Sym(M), or S A (M), is the quotient algebra over A
of the tensor algebra T(M) by the two-sided ideal 3' {also denoted by 3 M ) generated by
the elements xy-yx = x®y-y®x o/T(M), where x andy run through M.

Since the ideal 3' is generated by homogeneous elements of degree 2, it is a
graded ideal (II, § 11, no. 3, Proposition 2); we write 3n = 3' ^ T rt (M); the
algebra S(M) is then graded by the graduation (called canonical) consisting of
the S n (M) = T n (M)/3;. Now 3o = Si = {0} and hence S°(M) is canonically
identified with A and S X (M) with T X (M) = M; we shall always make these
identifications in what follows and denote by &lt;j/ or §' u the canonical injection
M-&gt;S(M).

Proposition 1. The algebra S(M) is commutative.

By definition $'(x)$'(y) = $'{y)$'(x) for x,y in M and, as the elements
(J&gt;'(#), where x runs through M, generate S(M), the conclusion follows from
§ 1, no. 7.

Proposition 2. Let E be an A-algebra and/: M -&gt; E an A-linear mapping such that

(i) /(*)/(*) =/(y)/W&gt; m *&gt;y in M -

There exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism g:S(M)-&gt;E such that
f=g°V-

In other words, (S(M), &lt;j&gt;') is a solution of the universal mapping problem
(Set Theory, IV, § 3, no. 1), where S is the species of A-algebra structure, the
a-mappings being the linear mappings of the A-module M to an A-algebra
satisfying (1).

The uniqueness of^ follows from the fact that &lt;i&gt;'(M) = M generates S(M).
To prove the existence of g, note that by virtue of § 5, No. 1, Proposition 1
there exists an A-algebra homomorphism g x : T(M) -^ E such that/ = g x o §;

497



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

all that needs to be proved is that g t is zero on the ideal 3', for then,
ftp: T(M) -&gt;• S(M) = T(M)/g' is the canonical homomorphism, we can write
g t = gop } where g: S(M) -&gt;E is an algebra homomorphism, and the con-
clusion will follow from the fact that/&gt; o ^ = ^'. Now the kernel of g x is a two-
sided ideal which, by virtue of (1) and the relation g x o &lt;[&gt; = /, contains the
elements x ® y — y &lt;g) x for x, y in M. This completes the proof.

Remarks. (1) Suppose that E is a graded A-algebra of type Z, with graduation
(E n ), and suppose also that the linear mapping/ (assumed to satisfy (1)) is
such that

(2) /(M) c E x .

Then the relation g(x x x 2 . . .*,) =f(x 1 )f{x 2 ) . . .f(x p ) with the ^ e M shows
thatg(S p (M)) c: E p forall/&gt; ^ and hence g is a graded algebra homomorphism.

(2) Every element of S(M) is a sum of products of the form x x x 2 . . . x n , where
the x t belong to M; care should be taken not to confuse such products taken in
S(M) with the analogous products taken in T(M).

(3) If n\ . 1 is invertible in A, the A-module S n (M) is generated by the ele-
ments of the form x n , where xeM; this follows from the above remark and I,
§ 8, no. 2, Proposition 2.

2. FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES OF THE SYMMETRIC ALGEBRA

Proposition 3. Let A be a commutative ring, M and N two A-modules and u : M -&gt; N
an A-linear mapping. There exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism
u': S(M) -&gt; S(N) such that the diagram

M — "—&gt; N

S(M) -^&gt; S(N)
is commutative. Moreover, u' is a graded algebra homomorphism.

The existence and uniqueness of u' follow from no. 1, Proposition 2 applied
to the commutative algebra S(N) and/ = ^ ° u: M -&gt; S(N) ; as

/(M) c S^N) = N,

the fact that u' is a graded algebra homomorphism follows from no. 1, Remark
1.

The homomorphism u' of Proposition 3 will henceforth be denoted by S(u).
If P is an A-module and v. N -&gt; P an A-linear mapping, then

(3) S(v o u ) = S(v) o S(ti)
498



FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES OF THE SYMMETRIC ALGEBRA § 6.2

for S(v) o S(m) is an algebra homomorphism rendering commutative the
diagram

M ^-&gt;P

&lt;!&gt;p

S ( M ) irrirf S(P)

S(») oS(u)

As S(M) contains M = S 1 (M), S(u) is sometimes called the canonical ex-
tension of u to S(M). The restriction S n (u) : S n (M) -&gt; S n (N) is such that

S n («) (*!* a ...*») =«(*!)« (* a ) • ••«(*„)

where the x t e M, since S(u) is an algebra homomorphism and S 1 (m) = a; the
restriction S°(m) to A is the identity mapping. Note that S n (w) can be obtained
from T ft («) : T n (M) -&gt; T n (N) by passing to the quotients.

Proposition 4. if m : M -&gt; N w a surjective A-linear mapping, the homomorphism
S(u) : S(M) -^ S(N) is surjective and its kernel is the ideal q/"S(M) generated by the
kernel P c M c S(M) o/"«.

We write y = T(m) : T(M) -&gt; T(N) ; we know (§ 5, no. 2, Proposition 3)
that v is surjective and hence it follows from the definitions that z&gt;(3m) — 3n5

if ^ is the kernel of v, then p 1 ^) = ^ + 3m- As S(«) : T(M)/3 M -&gt; T(N)/3{,
is derived from v by passing to the quotients, it is a surjective homomorphism
whose kernel is ®' = (&amp; + 3 m )/3m- As ^ is generated by the kernel P of u (§ 5,
no. 2), so is ®'.

If u: M -&gt; N is an infective linear mapping, it is not always true that S(u) is
an injective mapping (Exercise 1). However it is so when u is an injection such
that «(M) is a direct factor in N and then the image of S(u) (isomorphic to S(M))
is a direct factor of S(N) ; the proof is the same as that for the analogous asser-
tions for T(u) (§ 5, no. 2) replacing T by S.

Proposition 5. Let N and P be two submodules of an A-module M such that their
sum N + Piffl direct factor in M and their intersection N nP is a direct factor in N
and in P. Then the homomorphisms S(N) -&gt; S(M), S(P) -&gt; S(M) and

S(NnP)-&gt;S(M),

canonical extensions of the canonical injections, are injective ; z/"S(N), S(P) and S(N n P)
are identified with subalgebras of S(M) by means of these homomorphisms, then

(4) S(N nP) = S(N) n S(P).

The proof reduces to that of § 5, no. 2, Proposition 4 replacing T by S through-
out. The hypotheses of Proposition 5 always hold for arbitrary submodules
N, P of M when A is a field.

499



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Corollary. Let IS. be a commutative field and M a vector space over K. For every
element z e S(M) there exists a smallest vector space No/M such that z e S(N) and N
is finite-dimensional.

The proof is derived from that of § 5, no. 2, Corollary to Proposition 4 re-
placing T by S throughout.

N is called the vector subspace of M associated with z.

3. n-th SYMMETRIC POWER OF A MODULE AND SYMMETRIC MULTI-
LINEAR MAPPINGS

Let X, Y be two sets and n an integer ^ 1 . A symmetric mapping of X n into Y is
any mapping/: X n -&gt; Y such that, for every permutation cr £ 6 n and every
element (x t ) e X B ,

\P) f( x oa)&gt; x o(2)&gt; • • •&gt; x o(n)J ~f\ x Xi *2&gt; • • •} *»»)•

As the transpositions which exchange two consecutive integers generate the
group n (I, § 5, no. 7), it suffices that condition (5) hold when a is such a
transposition.

When Y is a module over a commutative ring A, clearly the set of symmetric
mappings of X n into Y is a submodule of the A-module Y x " of all mappings of
X n into Y.

Proposition 6. Let A be a commutative ring and M and N two A-modules. If with
every A-linear mapping g: S n (M) -&gt; N (n ^ 1) is associated the n-linear mapping

(6) (* 1} x 2 , . . . , x n ) h*. g{x 1 x 2 ...x n )

(where on the right-hand side the product is taken in the algebra S(M)), a bijective
A-linear mapping is obtained of the A-module Hom A (S n (M), N) onto the A-module of
symmetric w-linear mappings ofM. n into N.

Recall (II, § 3, no. 9) that there is a canonical bijection of the A-module
Hom A (T n (M), N) onto the A-module -2? n (M, . . ., M; N) of all n-linear map-
pings of M n into N obtained by associating with every A-linear mapping f:
T n (M) — &gt; N the n-linear mapping

(7) /: (X lt X a , • • • , *n) *-+f{*l ® *2 ® • • • &lt;8&gt; *n)«

On the other hand, the A-linear mappings g: S n (M) -&gt; N are in one-to-one
correspondence with the A-linear mappings/: T^M) -&gt; N such that / is zero
on 3£, by associating with g the mapping/ = g °p n , where



p n : T»(M) -&gt; S n (M) = T»(M)/s;

omorphism (II, § 2, no. 1, Theon
'elements of the form

(«i ® « 2 ® • • • ® «p) ® (* y - y ® *) (»i ® • • • ® o n -i»-a)



is the canonical homomorphism (II, §2, no. 1, Theorem 1). But as 3^ is a
linear combination of elements of the form



500



tt-th SYMMETRIC POWER § 6.3

(x, y, u u Vj in M), to say that the function/ is of the form g o p n means that the
corresponding n-linear function /satisfies the relation

f(u lt . . ., u p , x,y, v 1} . . ., v n _ p _ 2 ) =/(«i, • • ., u p ,y, x, v lt . . ., v n . p . 2 );

in other words, by what has been seen above, this means that /is symmetric;
whence the proposition, taking account of the fact that

/&gt;„(*! * 2 ® ' ' * ® *n) = *1*2- • -*n

with the x { e M.

The A-module S n (M) is called the n-th symmetric power of M. For every A-
module homomorphism u : M -&gt; N, the mapping S n (u) : S n (M) -&gt;■ S n (N) which
coincides with S(w) on S n (M) is called the n-th symmetric power qfu.

Remark. Let a be a permutation in €5 n ; as the mapping

(*!, * 2 , . . . , x n ) ■-* * -i (1) (8) x -i (2) ® • • • ® A: -i (n)

of M n into T^M) is A-multilinear, it may be written uniquely as

(*!, . . ., *„) h&gt; M a (^ &lt;2&gt; # 2 ® • • • ® * n ),

where u a is an endomorphism of the A-module T n (M), also denoted by z i-xr. z.
Clearly, if a is the identity element of &amp; n , u a is the identity; on the other hand,
writing^ = x a -i (1) , we obtain, for every permutation xe © n ,y T -i ({) =#o~ 1 (t~ 1 (D)
and hence T.(a.z) = (ra).z; in other words, the A-module T n (M) is a left
&amp; n -set under the operation (a, z) i-&gt; a.z (I, § 5, no. 1). The elements of T^M)
such that a.z = z for all a e &amp; n are called (contravariant) symmetric tensors of
order n; they form a sub-A-module S n (M) of T n (M).

For all z e T n (M), we write s.z = zL, a.z and call s.z the symmetrization

of the tensor z; clearly $.z is a symmetric tensor and therefore z t-&gt;- s.z is an
endomorphism of T n (M) whose image S£(M) is contained in S n (M); in
general, S£(M) # S n (M) (Exercise 5). If z is a symmetric tensor, then
s.z = n \z ; it follows that when n ! is invertible in A, the endomorphism z ■-»• (n\)~ 1 s.z
is a projector of "P(M) (II, § 1, no. 8), whose image is S n (M) = S£(M) ; more-
over the kernel on this projector is just 3 n . For, obviously a(3„) ^ 3n for all
a e n and 3 n is by definition generated by the tensors z — p . z, where p is a
transposition exchanging two consecutive numbers in (1, n); also, if a, t are
two permutations in 6 n , then z — (&lt;jt) .z = z — &lt;r.z + a.(z — t.z), whence
it follows (since every permutation in @ n is a product of transpositions ex-
changing two consecutive numbers) that z — a.z e 3„ for all z e T"(M) and
a £ @ n . Therefore (always supposing that n! is invertible in A), it is seen that

z — (n!) _1 s.z = A, (n!) _1 (z — a.z) e 3 n for all zeT n (M), which proves
our assertion.

501



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

When n! is invertible in A, the submodules S^(M) and 9£ of T n (M) are
therefore supplementary and the restriction to S£(M) of the canonical homo-
morphism T^M) -&gt; S n (M) = T n (M)/3£ is an A-module isomorphism, which
allows us in the case envisaged to identify symmetric tensors of order n with the
elements of the n-th symmetric power of M. Note however that this identifica-
tion is not compatible with multiplication, the product (in T(M)) of two
symmetric tensors not being symmetric in general and not therefore having
as image in S(M) the product of the images of the symmetric tensors con-
sidered.

4. EXTENSION OF THE RING OF SCALARS

Let A, A' be two commutative rings, p : A -» A' a ring homomorphism, M an
A-module, M' an A'-module and/: M -&gt; M' an A-homomorphism (relative to p)

of M into M'. The composite mapping M -&gt; M' — ^&gt; S A '(M') is an A-linear
mapping of M into the commutative algebra p*(S A (M')); then there exists
no. 1, Proposition 2) one and only one A-homomorphism of algebras
/': S A (M) -&gt; S A ' (M') rendering commutative the diagram



M — &gt; M'



(8) *'m



&lt;I&gt;'m'



S A (M) -^ S A , (M')

It follows immediately that if cr: A' -^ A" is another ring homomorphism,
M" an A"-module, g:M' -&gt;M" an A'-homomorphism (relative to a) and
g': S A ' (M') -&gt; S A »(M") the corresponding A'-homomorphism of algebras, then
the composite A-homomorphism of algebras

(9) S A (M) -£* S A , (M') -^&gt; S A .(M')

corresponds to the composite A-homomorphism g of. M -&gt; M" (relative to
a op).

Proposition 7. Let A, B be two commutative rings, p: A -&gt; B a ring homomorphism
and M an A-module. The canonical extension

&lt;J,:S B (B(g&gt; A M)-&gt;B® A S A (M)

of the B-linear mapping 1 B &lt;g) ^ f u : B &lt;g) A M -&gt; B ® A S A (M) is a graded B-algebra
isomorphism.

The proof is derived from that of § 5, no. 3, Proposition 5 replacing T by S
and &lt;j&gt; M by &lt;J&gt;J,.

502



DIRECT LIMIT OF SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS § 6.5

5. DIRECT LIMIT OF SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Let (A,,, &lt;J&gt;Ba) be a directed direct system of commutative rings, (M a ,/ Ba ) a direct
system of A a -modules, A = lim A a and M = lim M a . For a ^ j3, we derive
canonically from the A-homomorphism /,,«: M a -&gt; M p an A^-algebra homo-
morphism (no. 4, formula (8)) / B ' a : S Aa (M a ) -^ S Ap (M p ) and it follows from

(9) (no. 4) that (S Aa (M a ),/ ' (X ) is a direct system of A^-algebras. On the other
hand, f K : M a -»M be the canonical A-homomorphism; we derive (no. 4,
formula (8)) an A^algebra homomorphism

and it also follows from (9) that the^' constitute a direct system of A a -homo-
morphisms.

Proposition 8. The A-homomorphism f = lim^': lim S Aa (M a ) -» S A (M) is
a graded algebra isomorphism.

The proof is the same as that of § 5, no. 5, Proposition 6 replacing through-
out T by S and &lt;j&gt; by &lt;j&gt;' and taking account of the fact that a direct limit of
commutative algebras is commutative.

6. SYMMETRIC ALGEBRA OF A DIRECT SUM. SYMMETRIC ALGEBRA OF
A FREE MODULE. SYMMETRIC ALGEBRA OF A GRADED MODULE

Let A be a commutative ring, M = © M K the direct sum of a family of

A-modules axidj K : M x -&gt;-M the canonical injection; we derive an A-homo-
morphism of algebras S(j K ): S(M X ) -&gt;S(M). Since S(M) is commutative,
Proposition 8 of §4, no. 5, can be applied to the homomorphisms S(j\) and
there therefore exists a unique algebra homomorphism

(10) 5 :&lt;g&gt;S(M x )-&gt;S(M)

(also denoted by g u ) such that S(j\) = g °f x for all X e L, where

A:S(M,)-&gt;®S(M X )
denotes the canonical homomorphism.

Proposition 9. The canonical homomorphism g (formula (10)) is a graded algebra
isomorphism (cf. § 4, no. 8, Remark 1).

To prove that g is bijective, we define an algebra homomorphism

(11) h:S(M)^®S(MJ

503



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

such that g o h and hog are respectively the identity mappings on S(M) and
Vy S(M X ). For each X e L, let u k be the composite linear mapping

M,-^S(M X )-^®S(M X ).
There exists one and only one A-linear mapping u: M -&gt; Qy S(M X ) such that

X6 Ij

u oj\ = u K for all X e L. As the S(M X ) are commutative, so is their tensor
product (§4, no. 5) and hence (no. 1, Proposition 2) there exists a unique
algebra homomorphism h: S(M) -&gt; yy S(M x ) such that h o §' M = u; on

X 6 L

the other hand, it is immediate that «(M) is contained in the submodule of
elements of degree 1 of the graded algebra Qy S(M^) and hence h is a graded
algebra homomorphism. For # x e M x ,

KgfaM)) = KgUkWuM))) = h(S(j K )(^M)) - *(*mC/x(*x))) =«*(*»);

as the u k (x K ) generate the algebra ® S(M A ) (§ 4, no. 5, Proposition 8), hog
is certainly the identity mapping. Similarly,

*(A(«iOx(*a)))) = *(«*(**)) = gifdVuM)) = SC/x)(«ix W) = &lt;KiC/x(*x))

and, as the elements $m(A(*;i)) generate the algebra S(M), g o A is certainly
the identity mapping.

Remark (1) Let N = © N x be the direct sum of another family of A-modules

X€ L

with L as indexing set and, for all X e L, let v K : M X -&gt;N X be an A-linear mapping,
whence there is an A-linear mapping v = ® v k : M-&gt;N (II, § 1, no. 6,
Proposition 6). Then the diagram

®S(MO-^S(M)

A6L1

x © S(^) S(p)

Y T

®S(NJ-— &gt;S(N)

is commutative, as follows from the definitions (§ 4, no. 5, Corollary to
Proposition 8).

The sub-A-module of Qy S(M X ) with which S n (M) is identified by means of

X € L

the isomorphism g can be described more precisely. For every finite subset J of
L, we write Ej = ® S(M X ), so that ® S(MJ = lim Ej relative to the



\eJ v ""' XeL



504



SYMMETRIC ALGEBRA OF A DIRECT SUM § 6.6

directed set $(L) of finite subsets of L, by definition (§ 4, no. 5). For every
family v = (raj e N (L) (thus having finite support) such that 2^ n K = n and
every finite subset J of L containing the support of the family v, we write

(12) S J - V (M) = &lt;8&gt; SMM X )

so that the submodule E JtB of elements of degree n in Ej is the direct sum
of the S J,V (M) over all the families v of support contained in J and such

that 2 % = n (§4, no. 7, Proposition 10 and §4, no. 8). As a convention

we write S J * V (M) = {0} for the families v whose support is not contained in J;
then E J&gt;n can also be called the direct sum of all the S J,V (M), where v runs

through the set H n of all families v = («x)a.6L such that 2^ n K = n. Since
S°(M X ) is identified with A, clearly also, for two finite subsets J &lt;=■ J' of L and a
family v of support contained in J, the canonical mapping S J « V (M) -» S J/ * V (M)
(restriction of the canonical mapping Ej-&gt;Ej to S J,V (M)) is bijective. If we
write, for all v e H n ,

(13) S V (M) =limS J - v (M)

it is seen that, taking account of II, § 6, no. 2, Proposition 5:

Corollary. The A-module S n (M) is the image under isomorphism (10) of the

submodule of (3) S(M X ) the direct sum of the submodules S V (M) for all the families

X € L

v = (raj eN (L) such that 2, n K — »; if J is the support o/"v, S V (M) is canonically
isomorphic to ® S tt *(M x ).



XsJ



In general S V (M), v9 S rt ^(M x ) and their image in S n (M) are identified.



\eJ



Theorem 1. Let A be a commutative ring and M a free A-module with basis (e k ) Kett .
For every mapping a: L -&gt; N of finite support, we write

(14) ^-El*"

(product in the commutative algebra S(M)). Then, when a runs through the set N (L) of
mappings ofL into N, of finite support, the e*form a basis of the A-module S(M).

As M is the direct sum of the M x = Ae K , it suffices to prove the theorem
when L is reduced to a single element and then apply Proposition 9. But when
M = Ae (e a free element), then x (g&gt; y — y (8) x = for all x,y in M; the
ideal 3' is therefore zero, whence T(A*) = S(A*) and the theorem then follows
from § 5, no. 5, Theorem 1.

505



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

The multiplication table of the basis (14) is given by

(15) e*e* = e a+B

where a + (3 is the mapping X i-* a (X) + P(X) of L into N. In other words, the
basis (e a ) of S(M), with the multiplicative law (15), is canonically isomorphic
to the free commutative monoid N (L) derived from L; it follows (§ 2, no. 9)
that the symmetric algebra S(M) of a free module M with basis whose indexing set is
L, u canonically isomorphic to the polynomial algebra A[(X X ) X6L ], the canonical
isomorphism being obtained by mapping e K to X x . In particular (§ 2, no. 7,
Proposition 7), for every mapping/: L -&gt; E of L into a commutative A-algebra E,
there exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism /: S(M) -&gt;E such
that/(0 = /(X).

Remark (2). The above results can equally well be obtained as a consequence
of the universal properties of polynomial algebras and symmetric algebras,
taking account of II, § 1, no. 11, Corollary 3 to Proposition 17.

Corollary. IfM. is a projective A-module, S(M) is a projective A-module.

The proof is the same as that for § 5, no. 5, Corollary to Theorem 1, re-
placing T by S.

Proposition 10. Let A be a commutative monoid, M a graded A-module of type A
and (M a ) a6A its graduation. For every ordered pair (a, n) e A x N, let S a,n (M) be

the submodule of S n (M) the direct sum of the submodules yy S n *(M a J, where (%)xeL
runs through the set of families of integers ^ such that 2-&lt; n x = n, J is its support and,

for each (n^), (a x )^ eJ runs through the set of families of A J such that 2-, a x = a. Then

(S a,n (M)) (an)eA xN is the only graduation of type A x N compatible with the algebra
structure on S(M) and which induces on M = S X (M) the given graduation.

The fact that S(M) is the direct sum of the S a ' n (M) follows from the Corollary
to Proposition 9; the rest of the proof is identical with the end of the proof of
§ 5, no. 5, Proposition 7.

Suppose more particularly that A = Z and let S(M) be given the total gradua-
tion (of type Z) (II, § 11, no. 1) corresponding to the graduation of type
Z x N (and hence also of type Z x Z) defined above; the homogeneous
elements of degree n e Z under this graduation are therefore those of the direct
sum of the S a,m (M) for q + m = n. Let f be a homogeneous linear mapping of
degree of the graded A-module M into a commutative graded A-algebra F of
type Z; then the algebra homomorphism g: S(M) -*► F such that/ = g o §' M
is a homomorphism of graded algebras of type Z, as follows from the formula
g{x-iX2. . .x n ) =f(x 1 )f(x 2 ) • . -f(x n ) for homogeneous x t in M, from the hypo-
thesis on /and from the definition of the graduation of type Z on S(M).

506



§ 7. EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS

1. DEFINITION OF THE EXTERIOR ALGEBRA OF A MODULE

Definition 1 . Let A be a commutative ring and M an A-module. The exterior algebra
ofM, denoted by A (M) or Alt(M) or A A (M) , is the algebra over A the quotient of the
tensor algebra T(M) by the two-sided ideal 3" (also denoted by 3 M ) generated by the
elements x &lt;g) x, where x runs through M.

Since the ideal 3" is generated by homogeneous elements of degree 2, it is a
graded ideal (II, § 11, no. 3, Proposition 2); we write Zl = 3" n T»(M); the
algebra A(M) is therefore graded by the graduation (called canonical) con-
sisting of the A n (M) = l n {M)jZl Then 3S = 3i = {0} and hence A°(M)
is identified with A and A X (M) with T X (M) = M; in what follows we shall
always make these identification and the canonical injection M -&gt; A (M) will
be denoted by &lt;j&gt;" or &lt;j&gt; M .

Proposition 1. Let E be an A-algebra andf: M -&gt; E an A-linear mapping such that

(1) C/X*)) 2 = for all xeM.

There exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism g: A(M) -&gt;E such that

f=g°¥-

In other words, (A(M), §") is a solution of the universal mapping problem
(Set Theory, IV, § 3, no. 1), where S is the species of A-algebra structure, the
a-mappings being the linear mappings from the A-module M to an A-alge-
bra satisfying (1).

The uniqueness of g follows from the fact that &lt;J&gt;"(M) = M generates A (M).
To prove the existence of g, we note that by § 5, no. 1, Proposition 1 there
exists an A-algebra homomorphism g x : T(M) -&gt; E such that/= g ± ° &lt;|&gt;; we
need to prove that g x is zero on the ideal 3", for then if

/&gt;:T(M)-&gt;A(M) =T(M)/3*

is the canonical homomorphism, we can write g ± = g°p, where g : A (M) -*- E
is an algebra homomorphism and the conclusion will follow from the fact
that/» o § = &lt;J&gt;". Now, the kernel of g x is a two-sided ideal which, by virtue of
(1) and the relation g x o ^ =/, contains the elements x x for x e M. This
completes the proof.

507



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Remarks. ( 1 ) Suppose that E is a graded A-algebra of type Z, of graduation (E n ) ,
and suppose also that the linear mapping/ (assumed to satisfy (1)) is such that

(2) /(M) c Ex.

Then the relation g{x 1 x 2 . . ,x p ) = /(# 1 )/(# 2 ) . . .f(x p ) with the x t e M shows
that g(A P (M)) &lt;= E p for all p ^ and hence g is a graded algebra homo-
morphism.

(2) To avoid confusion, the product of two elements u, v of the exterior
algebra A(M) is usually denoted by u A v and is called the exterior product of u
by v. The elements of A n (M) are therefore the sums of elements of the form
*i A x 2 A • • • A n n with #, e M for 1 ^ i «£ n and are often called n-vectors.

2. FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES OF THE EXTERIOR ALGEBRA

Proposition 2. Let A be a commutative ring, M and N two A-modules and u : M -&gt; N
*m A-linear mapping. There exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism

w":A(M)-&gt;A(N)
such that the diagram

M u —&gt; N

T Y

A(M) -^ A(N)
£y commutative. Moreover, u" is a graded algebra homomorphism. '

The existence and uniqueness of u' follow from no. 1, Proposition 1 applied

to the algebra A(N) and/ = &lt;&amp; o u: M -^ A (N) ; for/(M) c: N and hence

/satisfies condition (1) by definition of 3n- as/(M) cz A (N) = N, the fact
that u" is a graded algebra homomorphism follows from Remark 1 of no. 1 .

The homomorphism u" of Proposition 2 will henceforth be denoted by /\{u).
If P is an A-module and v: N -&gt; P is an A-linear mapping, then

(3) A(»o«) = A (*)&lt;&gt; A (a)

for /\(o) o /\(m) is an algebra homomorphism which renders commutative the
diagram

M &gt; P

508



FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES OF THE EXTERIOR ALGEBRA § 7.2

Since A(M) contains M = A 1 (M), A(«) is sometimes called the canonical
extension of u to A(M). The restriction A n (u) : A W (M) -&gt; A n (N) is such that

(4) A n («)(*i A x 2 A • • • A *») = «(*i) A u(x 2 ) A • • A u(x n )

with the #{ e M, since A(m) is an algebra homomorphism and A (u) — u; the
restriction A°(u) to A is the identity mapping. Note that A n («) is obtained
from T"(m) : 'P(M) -&gt; T*(N) by passing to the quotients.

Proposition 3. If u:M-&gt;N is a surjective A-linear mapping, the homomorphism
A(k) : A(M) -&gt; A(N) is surjective and its kernel is the two-sided ideal of A(M)
generated by the kernel P c M c= A(M) ofu.

The proof is derived from that of § 6, no. 2, Proposition 4, replacing S by
A and 3' by 3'.

If u: M -&gt; N is an injective linear mapping, it is not always true that A(u)
is an injective mapping (§6, Exercise 3) (see however below no. 9,
Corollary to Proposition 12) . However this is so when u is an injection such that

m(M) is a direct factor of N and then the image of A(m) (isomorphic to A(M))
is a direct factor of A(N) ; the proof is the same as that for the analogous asser-
tions for T(w) (§ 5, no. 2) replacing T by A.

Proposition 4. Let N and P be two submodules of an A-module M such that their
sum N + P is a direct factor in M and their intersection NnPisa direct factor in N
and in P. Then the homomorphisms A(N)-&gt;A(M), A(P)-»A(M) and
A(NnP)-&gt; A(M), canonical extensions of the canonical injections, are injective; if

A(N), A(P) and A(N n P) are identified with subalgebras ofA(M) by means of
these homomorphisms, then

(5) A(N n P) = A(N) n A(P).

The proof is derived from that of § 5, no. 2, Proposition 4 replacing T by
A throughout. The hypotheses of Proposition 4 are always satisfied by arbitrary
submodules N, P of M when A is afield.

Corollary. Let K be a commutative field and M a vector space over K. For every

element z e A(M), there exists a smallest vector subspace No/M such that z e A(N)
and N is finite-dimensional.

The proof is deduced from that of § 5, no. 2, Corollary to Proposition 4 re-
placing T by A throughout.

N is called the vector subspace of M associated with the element z of A(M).

509



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

3. ANTICOMMUTATIVITY OF THE EXTERIOR ALGEBRA

Proposition 5. (i) Let (x t ) 1&lt;l&lt;n be a finite sequence of elements of the module M;for
every permutation a in the symmetric group S n ,

( 6 ) *ou&gt; A *o(2) A • • • A * 0(n) = e a .x x A^A'-Ax,

where e denotes the signature of the permutation a.

(ii) If there exist two distinct indices i,j such that x { = x it the product

x x A x 2 A • • • A x n
is zero.

(i) First of all, since x A x = for all x e M by definition of the ideal 3",
also, for x, y in M,

xAy+yAx=(x+y) A (x + y) -xAx-yAy = 0.

This establishes (6) in the case n = 2. The general case then follows from § 4,
no. 6, Lemma 3.

(ii) Under the hypothesis of (ii), there exists a permutation or e &lt;S n such that
&lt;t(1) = i and &lt;x(2) = j; then the left hand side of (6) is zero for this permuta-
tion and hence so is the right hand side.

Corollary 1. Let H, K be two complementary subsets of the interval (1, «) ofN
and let (ih)i^ h&lt;p , (jk)i*k*n-p be tne sequences of elements of Hand K respectively,
arranged in increasing order; we write

*h = x h A x i2 A • • • A x ip , x K = x h A x h A ■ • • A x Jn _ p ;
then

(7) * H A x K = (-1)% A x 2 A • • • A x n
where v is the number of ordered pairs (i,j) e H x K such that i &gt; j.

By Proposition 5 this reduces to proving

Lemma 1. If a e 6 n is the permutation such that a(h) = i h for 1 ^ h &lt; p,
&lt;*(*) =Jh- P forp + 1 &lt; h s$ n, then e a = (-l) v .

For 1 ^ h &lt; h' ^ p orp + 1 &lt; h &lt; b! &lt; n, a(h') &gt; a{h) and the number
of ordered pairs (h, h') such that 1 &lt; h &lt; p &lt; b! ^ n and c{h) &gt; a(h') is
equal to v.

Corollary 2. The graded algebra A(M) is alternating (§ 4, no. 9).

It suffices to apply Proposition 13 of § 4, no. 9 to A(M), taking as genera-
ting system the set M and using Proposition 5.

510



«-th EXTERIOR POWER OF A MODULE § 7.4

Proposition 6. If Mis a finitely generated A-module, A(M) is a finitely generated
A-module; also, i/M admits a generating system with n elements, then A P (M) = {0}
forp &gt; n.

Let (* t )i&lt;t&lt;» be a generating system of M. Every element of A P (M) is a
linear combination of elements of the form

**i A x i2 A • • • A x ip

where the indices i k belong to (1, n); by Proposition 5, these indices can be
assumed to be distinct (otherwise the corresponding element is zero). Up &gt; n.
there is no such sequence of indices and hence A P (M) = {0}. If p ^ n, these
sequences are finite in number, which completes the proof.

4. n -th EXTERIOR POWER OF A MODULE AND ALTERNATING MULTI-
LINEAR MAPPINGS

Given two modules M, N over a commutative ring A, an alternating n-linear
mapping of M n into N is any n-linear mapping/: M n -&gt; N such that, for all
p &lt; n - 2,

(8) /(«!, • • • , Up, x } X, V 1} . . . , On-p-a) = °

for all x, the u { (1 &lt; t &lt; p) and the ^ (1 &lt; j &lt; n - p - 2) in M.

Proposition 7. Let A be a commutative ring and M and N two A-modules. If with
every A-linear mapping g: A n (M) -+ N (n ^ 2) is associated the n-linear mapping

(9) (*i, x 2 , ...,*„)»-»• g(x x A x 2 A • • • A *„)

a bijective A-linear mapping is obtained of the A-module Hom A (A n (M), N) onto
the A-module of alternating n-linear mappings ofM n into N.

We consider the canonical bijection of the A-module Hom A (T n (M), N) onto
the A-module J2f B (M, . . ., M; N) of all n-linear mappings of M n into N,
obtained by associating with every A-linear mapping/: T n (M) -&gt;N the n-
linear mapping

/: (*i, • • •» *n) ^/(*i ® x 2 ® ' ' • ® *n)

(II, § 3, no. 9). On the other hand, the A-linear mappings g: A B (M) -&gt; N are
in one-to-one correspondence with the A-linear mappings/: T"(M) -&gt; N such
that/w zero on 3 n , by associating with 5 the mapping/ = g°p n , where

f B : T»(M) -* A n (M) = T»(M)/s:

511



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

is the canonical homomorphism (II, § 2, no. 1, Theorem 1). But as 3£ is a
linear combination of elements of the form

(«! &lt;g) u 2 ® • • • ® u p ) ® (x &lt;S) x) ® (z&gt;! &lt;g) • • • (8) z&gt; n _ p _ 2 )

(x, « i} z&gt; y in M), to say that/ is of the form g°p n means that the corresponding
n-linear function /satisfies (8), in other words it is alternating.

The A-module A"(M) is called the n-th exterior power of M. For every A-
module homomorphism u: M -&gt; N, the mapping

A&gt;):A n (M)-&gt;A n (N)

which coincides with A(m) on A"(M) is called the n-th exterior power ofu.

Corollary 1. For every alternating n-linear mapping g: M n -&gt; N,for every permu-
tation a e n ,

(10) g( x o(.l)&gt; *a(2)&gt; • ' ' &gt; x a(nV = e a •£(*!.&gt; *2&gt; • • • &gt; x n)

for all x t eM; moreover ifx i = Xjfor two distinct indices i,j } then

g{ x u x 2&gt; • • - &gt; x n) = 0.
This is an obvious consequence of Proposition 7 and no. 3, Proposition 5.

Corollary 2. Let (Xj) 1&lt;i&lt;n oe a sequence qfn elements o/M such that

#i A x 2 A • • • A x n = 0;
then, for every alternating n-linear mapping g: M n -&gt; N, g(x ly . . . , x n ) = 0.

Corollary 3. Let /:M n-1 -»A be an alternating (n — \)-linear form. If
(*i)i«i«:n " a sequence of n elements ofM such that x x A x 2 A • • • A x n = 0, then

n

(ii) 2 (-iyf(x 1} ...,x i ,... )Xn ) . Xt = o

{where we write f(x lt . . ., x i} . . ., x n ) = f(x lt . . ., x t _ lt x l + li . . ., x n ) for
1 ^ i ^ n.

It suffices to prove that the n-linear mapping

n

(x l5 ...,*„)»-* Z (-l)y(xi, • • •, x j5 . . ., x n ) .X,

of M n to M is alternating. Now, if x { = x i + ly all the terms in the sum on the
right hand side have zero coefficients except x { and x J + 1 , since/ is alternating;
on the other hand, the coefficient of x t is

( — l)/(x l3 . . . , Xj_ l3 X i + i, X i + 2 , . . ., X n )

512



EXTENSION OF THE RING OF SCALARS § 7.5

and that of x i+1 is (-l) i+1 /(*i, • • -, *i, *i +2 , • • •&gt; *n) and they are inverses
by hypothesis.

Remark. An element z of "P(M) is called a (contravariant) skew-symmetric
tensor of order n if a.z = e G z for every permutation a e 6 n (cf. § 6, no. 3,
Remark); these elements form a sub-A-module A^(M) of T^M). For all

zeT n (M) t we write a.z= Z, eJa.z) and call a . z the skew-symmetrization

v/ ' oeS n

of z; as s„ = e a s T , it is immediately seen that a. z is a skew-symmetric tensor
and therefore z ^ a.z is an endomorphism of T^M) whose image A£(M) is
contained in A^(M); in general A£(M) # A;(M) (Exercise 8). If z is a
skew-symmetric tensor, then a.z — n\z; hence, wforc n\ is invertible in A, the
endomorphism z i-* («!) _1 fl. z is a. projector of P*(M) whose image is

a;(M) = a;(M).

Moreover the &amp;era&lt;?/ of this projector is just S£; for attention may obviously
be confined to the case where n $s 2, hence 2 (a divisor of «!) is invertible in
A and x &lt;g) x = 2 _1 (* ® * + * ® *) ; therefore 3£ is generated by the ele-
ments z + p . z, where p is a transposition exchanging two consecutive num-
bers in (1, n); moreover, for two permutations cr, x in S n , we can write

z - s aT ((ax).z) = z - s T (x.z) + s,(t.z - e a a.{r.z))

whence it follows that z - e (&lt;r. z) e 3£ for all z e T tt (M) and a e 0„. There-
fore (always assuming n! is invertible in A), it is seen that

z-(n!)- 1 fl.z= 2 (n!)- 1 (z-e a (&lt;7.z))e3:

for all z e T n (M), which establishes our assertion.

When n! is invertible in A, the submodules A£(M) and Zn of T»(M) are
therefore supplementary and the restriction to A^(M) of the canonical homo-
morphism T n (M) -&gt; A n (M) = T*(M)/3£ is an A-module isomorphism, which
allows us in the case in question to identify skew-symmetric tensors of order n
with the elements of the n-th exterior power of M. Note here also that this
identification is not compatible with multiplication, the product in T(M) of
two skew-symmetric tensors not being skew-symmetric in general.

5. EXTENSION OF THE RING OF SCALARS

Let A, A' be two commutative rings, p:A-&gt;A' a ring homomorphism, M
an A-module, M' an A'-module and/:M -&gt; M' an A-homomorphism (relative

to p) of M into M'. The composite mapping M -4 M' — ^&gt; A A .(M') is an
A-linear mapping of M into the A-algebra A A -(M') and, as the elements of

513



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

f(M) c M' are of zero square in A A &lt;(M'), there exists (no. 1, Proposition 1)
one and only one A-homomorphism of algebras/" : A A (M) -» A A -(M') rendering
commutative the diagram

M L &gt; M'

(12) *M

A A (M) ~77&gt; A A ,(M')

and/" is a graded algebra homomorphism. It is immediately deduced that
if &lt;t: A' — &gt; A" is another ring homomorphism, M" an A"-module, g:M' —&gt; M"

an A'-homomorphism (relative to a) and g":A A &gt;(M') -&gt; A A »(M") the
corresponding A"-homomorphism of algebras, then the composite A-homo-
morphism of algebras

(13) A A (M) -£» A A ,(M') -£&gt; A A „(M")

corresponds to the composite A-homomorphism g of: M -&gt; M" (relative to

CTop).

Proposition 8. Let A, B be two commutative rings, p: A -&gt; B a ring homomorphism
and M an A-module. The canonical extension

&lt;l&gt;:A B (B(g&gt; A M)-&gt;B&lt;g&gt; A A A (M)

of the B-linear mapping 1 B &lt;g) &lt;j&gt; M :B ® A M-»B ® A A A (M) is a graded B-
algebra isomorphism.

The proof is derived from that of § 5, no. 4, Proposition 5 replacing T by
A and &lt;j&gt; M by fa.

6. DIRECT LIMITS OF EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS

Let (A a , &lt;j&gt; 0a ) be a directed direct system of commutative rings, (M a ,/ Boc ) a
direct system of A a -modules, A = lim A a and M = lim M a . For a ^ (3, we

derive canonically from the A a -homomorphism/ Ba :M a ^-M p an A^algebra

homomorphism (no. 5, formula (12)) f^'. A Aot (M a ) -&gt; A Ap (M p ) and it

follows from (13) that (A Aa (M a ),/p«) is a direct system of graded A^-modules.
On the other hand lety^: M a -^-Mbe the canonical A a -homomorphism; we
derive (no. 5, formula (12)) a graded A a -algebra homomorphism
/a-A Aa (M a ) -&gt; A A (M) and it also follows from (13) that the/« constitute
a direct system of A a -homomorphisms.

514



EXTERIOR ALGEBRA OF A DIRECT SUM § 7.7

Proposition 9. The A-homomorphism f = lim/« :lim A^M,) -&gt; A A (M) is
a graded algebra isomorphism.

The proof is the same as that of § 5, no. 4, Proposition 6 replacing throughout
T by A and &lt;j&gt; by §" and taking account of the fact that a direct limit of alter-
nating algebras is alternating.

7. EXTERIOR ALGEBRA OF A DIRECT SUM. EXTERIOR ALGEBRA OF A
GRADED MODULE

Let A be a commutative ring, M = © M x the direct sum of a family of a

X € L

family of A-modules andj x :M x -&gt;M the canonical injection; an A-homo-
morphism of graded algebras A(j\) : A(MJ -&gt; A(M) is derived. Since A (M)
is anticommutative, Proposition 10 of § 4, no. 7 (or if need be generalized
to the case where L is infinite, cf. §4, no. 8, Reamrk 1) can be applied to
the homomorphisms A (j x ) ; then there exists a unique algebra homomorphism

(14) £: B &lt;S&gt;A(M,)-&gt;A(M)

AG Li

(also denoted by g M ) such that A(j\) = g °f K , where
A:A(M,)-&gt;*® A(M0

denotes the canonical homomorphism.

Proposition 10. The canonical homomorphism g (formula (14)) is a graded algebra
isomorphism.

To prove that g is bijective, we define a graded algebra homomorphism

(15) h:A(M)-&gt; g ® A(M X )

such that go h and hog are respectively the identity mappings on A (M) and
A(M X ). For each X e L, consider the composite linear mapping



"(g)



« X :M, -^ A(M,) -£* *® A(M X ).
There exists one and only one A-linear mapping k:M-&gt; Qy A(MJ such

A. € Li

that u°j K = u K for all XeL. The skew tensor product £9 A(M X ) is an

alternating algebra: for, for L finite, this follows from § 4, no. 9, Proposition 14
and, for L arbitrary, this follows from the definition of this product given in
§ 4, no. 8, Remark 1 and the fact that a direct limit of alternating graded alge-

515



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

bras is alternating. As also u(M) is contained in the submodule of elements of
degree 1 in the graded algebra &amp; A (MO, it follows from no. 1, Proposition 1
and Remark 1 that there exists a unique graded algebra homomorphism.

A:A(M)-^*® A(MO

such that h o &lt;{&gt;£, = u. The verification of the fact that go h and hog are the
identity mappings is then performed as in § 6, no. 6, Proposition 9 replacing
S by A and ej&gt;' by &lt;J&gt;\

Remark. Let N = \B N x be the direct sum of another family of A-modules

Kg Lt

with L as indexing set and, for all XeL, let X : M x -&gt; N x be an A-linear
mapping, whence there is an A-linear mapping v = © p x :M-&gt;N (II, § 1,
no. 6, Proposition 7). Then the diagram

g ® A(M X ) -~h&gt; A(M)



XsL



®. Am



XeL

\6L



Aw



"® A(NO ► A(N)



is commutative (cf. § 4, no. 5, Corollary to Proposition 8).

The sub-A-module of §9 A (MO with which A n (M) is identified by means
of the isomorphism g can be described more precisely. For every finite subset
J of L, we write Ej = *CS&gt; A (MO, so that R ® A(M X ) = limEj relative
to the directed set $(L) of finite subsets of L, by definition (§ 4, no. 8,
Remark 1). For every family v ='(»0 eN &lt;L) (therefore with finite support)

such that Z, n x = n and every finite subset J of L containing the support of

Kelt

the family v, we write

(16) A J ' V (M) = (g&gt; A^(MO

so that the submodule Ej^ n of elements of degree n in Ej is the direct sum of
the A J,V (M) for all families v of support contained in J and such that

2* n x = n

(§ 4, no. 7, Proposition 10 and no. 8). By way of convention we write
A J,V (M) = {0} for the families v whose support is not contained in J; then

516



EXTERIOR ALGEBRA OF A FREE MODULE § 7.8

E Jf „ can also be called the direct sum of all the A ' V (M), where v runs through

the set H n of all families v = («x)xeL sucn tftat ^ n K = n. Since A (M x )
is identified with A, clearly also for two finite subsets J &lt;= J' of L and a family
v of support contained in J, the canonical mapping A ,V (M)-&gt;A ,V (M)
(restriction of the canonical mapping Ej^-Ej/ to A ,V (M)) is bijective. If
we write, for all v e H n ,

(17) A V (M) =limA J,v (M)

it is then seen that, taking account of II, § 6, no. 2, Proposition 5, we have:

Corollary. The A-module A n (M) is the image under isomorphism (14) of the
submoduleof e (&lt;y A(M X ) the direct sum of the submodules A V (M) for all families

v = (n K ) gN (L) such that 2* n K = n; if} is the support o/*v, A V (M) is canonically
isomorphic to Qs&gt; A nK (M k ).

In general A V (M), &amp; A n *(MjJ and their image in A"(M) are identified.
With this convention:

Proposition 1 1 . Let A be a commutative monoid, M a graded A-module of type A
and (M a ) aeA its graduation. For every ordered pair (a, n) eA x N, let A a,n (M)
be the submodule of A"(M) the direct sum of the submodules ® A n ^(M ax ), where

( w ;J\eL runs through the set of families of integers ^0 such that Z, n K — n, J is
its support and, for each (n K ), (a x ) XeJ runs through the set of families ofA J such that
2-, &lt;x K = a. Then (A ' (M)) (an)6AxN is the only graduation of type A x N com-
patible with the algebra structure on A(M) and which induces on M = A*(M) the
given graduation.

The fact that A (M) is the direct sum of the A"' n (M) follows from the Corol-
lary to Proposition 10; the rest of the proof is identical with the end of the
proof of § 5, no. 5, Proposition 7.

8. EXTERIOR ALGEBRA OF A FREE MODULE

Theorem 1. Let M be an A-module with a basis (e^) Ke i,. Let L be given the struc-
ture of a totally ordered set (Set Theory, III, § 2, no. 3, Theorem 1) and for every
finite subset] ofLwe write

( 18 ) e J = e*. x A e K2 A • • • A e u

517



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

where (X fc ) 1&lt;fc&lt;n is the sequence of elements of J arranged in increasing order (Set
Theory, III, § 5, no. 3, Proposition 6); we write e = 1, the unit element of A.
Then the e Jy where J runs through the set 5(L) of finite subsets of L, form a basis of
the exterior algebra A(M).

Since the e k generate the A-module M, every element of A (M) is a linear
combination of a finite number of products of the elements e K and hence
(taking account of no. 3, Proposition 5) is a linear combination of a finite
number of elements e 3 for J e $(L). It reduces to proving that the e 3 are
linearly independent over A. Otherwise, there would exist between these
elements a linear relation with coefficients not all zero; the union of the
subsets J which correspond to the e 3 whose coefficients in this relation are
#0 is a finite subset K of L (since there is only a finite number of coefficients
7^0). Let N be the submodule of M generated by the e K such that XeK;
N is a direct factor in M, hence (no. 2) A(N) is identified with a subalgebra

of A(M) and, if we show that the e 3 with J &lt;= K form a basis of A(N), we
shall obtain the desired contradiction.

It therefore reduces to providing Theorem 1 when the basis of M is finite;
we may therefore suppose that L = (1, m) &lt;= N. For each ieh, let M 4 be
the free submodule Ae { of M; M is the direct sum of the M f and A(M { ) is
the direct sum of A (Mj) = A and A X (M 4 ) = M ( (no. 3, Proposition 6).
Let A (M) be canonically identified with the A-module the tensor product of
the A(M f ) (no. 7, Proposition 10); the latter has as basis the tensor product
of the bases (1, e t ) of the A(M { ) (II, § 3, no. 7, Corollary 2 to Proposition 7) ;
thus we obtain all the elements

u x &lt;S&gt; u 2 (g) • • • ® u m

where either u t = 1 or u t — e t ; if J is the set of indices i such that u t — e i}
«i ® u 2 &lt;S&gt; • • • ® u m is identical with e J} which completes the proof.

Corollary 1. Suppose that L = (1, m); then the basis (£j)j e $(D °f A(M) has
2 m elements. For p &gt; m, A P (M) = {0}; A m (M) has a basis consisting of a single
element e^; for ^ p ^ m the number of elements in the basis (ej) of A P (M) con-
sisting of the e s such that Card (J) = p is

m\



0-



p\(m-p)\

This follows from Set Theory, III, § 3, no. 5, Proposition 12 and Set Theory,
III, § 5, no. 8, Corollary 1 to Proposition 1 1 .

We return to the case where the set L in Theorem 1 is arbitrary and give
518



CRITERIA FOR LINEAR INDEPENDENCE § 7.9

explicitly the multiplication table (§ 1, no. 7) of the basis (*j). Given two finite
subsets J, K of the totally ordered set L, we write

, 1Q , rP J( K = ifjHK#0

{ } Wk=(-1) v ifJnK=0

where v denotes the number of ordered pairs (X, y.) e J x K such that X &gt; [x.

Then Corollary 1 to Proposition 4 of no. 2 immediately implies the relation

(20) «jA%= Pj.k'juk-
Note the formula

(21) Pj.kP K .j= (-!)'*

when JnK= 0,j= Card (J), k = Card(K) (no. 3, Corollary 2 to Proposi-
tion 5.)

Corollary 2. If M. is a projective A-module, A(M) is a projective A-module.

The proof is the same as that of § 5, no. 5, Corollary to Theorem 1 re-
placing T by A.

Corollary 3. Let M be a projective A-module and (#i)i«;j&lt;n ajinite sequence of
elements ofM.. For there to exist on M an alternating n-linear form f such that

/(*i,*a&gt; •••&gt;*«) ¥&gt; 0,
it is necessary and sufficient that x t A x 2 A • • • A x n # 0.

We know already (with no hypothesis on M) that the condition is necessary
(no. 4, Proposition 7). Suppose now that M is projective and that

#! A x 2 A • • • A x n ^ 0.

Then A n (M) is projective (Corollary 2) and hence the canonical mapping

A*(M) -^ (A n (M))**

is injective (II, § 2, no. 7, Corollary 4 to Proposition 13); we conclude that

there exists a linear form g:A n (M) -&gt; A such that g(x t A x 2 A • • • A x n ) # 0.
Iff is the alternating H-linear form corresponding to g (no. 4, Proposition 7),
then/X*!, ...,* n ) ^ 0.

9. CRITERIA FOR LINEAR INDEPENDENCE

Proposition 12. Let M be a projective A-module. For elements x 1} x 2 , . . ., x n of
M to be linearly dependent, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist X # in A
such that

(22) X*i A x 2 A • • • A x n = 0.

519



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

The condition is necessary (with no hypothesis on M), for if for example
X#i (with X # 0) is a linear combination of x 2 , . . . , x n , relation (22) holds
(no. 3, Proposition 5). We show that the condition is sufficient by induction
on n; for n = 1, it is a trivial consequence of the definition. Suppose therefore
that n &gt; 1 and that condition (22) holds for some X # 0. If

X# 2 A x 3 A • • • A x n = 0,

then the induction hypothesis implies that x 2 , . . . , x n are linearly dependent
and hence a fortiori x X) x 2) . . .,x n are. If X* 2 A x 3 A • • • A x n # 0, it follows
from no. 8, Corollary 3 to Theorem 1 that there exists an alternating (n — 1)-
linear form/ such that/(Xx 2 A x 3 A • • • A #„) = fx ^ 0. Since

#i A (X# 2 ) A • • • A x n = 0,

it follows from no. 8, Corollary 3 to Theorem 1 that [LXx is a linear combina-
tion of Xx 2 , x 3 , . . . , x n ; hence x 1} x 2 , • • • , x n are linearly dependent.

Corollary. Let M and N be two projective A-modules and/: M -&gt; N an A-linear
mapping. Iff is injective, then f\(f) : A(M) -&gt; A(N) is injective.

We prove this first under the assumption that M is free; let (^)^, e t. De a
basis of M, so that (^j)j 6 g(L&gt; (formula (18)) is a basis of A(M). Suppose that
the kernel of A(/) contains an element « = 2-, ocj^j ^ 0. Let K be an ele-
ment minimal among the finite subsets J such that ocj # and let H be a
finite subset of L disjoint from K and such that KuH contains all the J
(finite in number) such that ocj # 0; for all J # K such that aj # 0, we have
therefore by definition J nH^O and consequently (no. 8, formula (20)).

u A e K = +a K &lt;? KuH

belongs to the two-sided ideal of A(M), the kernel of A(/). We write
%uh = *xi A e K2 A • • • A e hn ; then a K f(e Kl ) A /foj A • • • A/foJ = 0;
by virtue of Proposition 12, the elements f(e u ) (1 &lt; i &lt; n) of N are linearly
dependent. But this contradicts the hypothesis that/ is injective (II, § 1, no.
11, Corollary 3 to Proposition 17).

We now consider the general case; let M' be an A-module such that
M © M' = P is free (II, § 2, no. 2, Proposition 4) . Consider the linear mapping
£:M©M'-&gt;N©M©M' such that g{x,y) = (f(x), 0,y), so that there is
a commutative diagram

M — f —+ N



N©P



520



CRITERIA FOR LINEAR INDEPENDENCE § 7.9

where the vertical arrows are the canonical injections. Since g is injective
and P is free, A(g) is an injective homomorphism as has been seen above.
Now, A(j):A(M) -» A(P) is an injective homomorphism since M is a
direct factor in P (no. 2). The composite homomorphism

A(M) -^ A(P) -^H A(N ep)

is therefore injective and, as it is also equal to the composite homomorphism

A(M) -^l A(N) -^l A(N 0P)
we conclude that A(/) is injective.

Proposition 13. Let M be an A-module, N a direct factor submodule ofM which is
free of dimension p and {u} a basis of A P (N). For an element x e M to belong to N,
it is necessary and sufficient that u A x = 0.

Let P be a submodule of M complementary to N and let y e N, z g P be
such that x = y + z. Then u A x = u A z. As A P (N) is free of dimension 1,

the mapping §:F -» P ® A P (N) such that &lt;j&gt;(/&gt;) = P &lt;8&gt; « is bijective (II, § 3,
no. 4, Proposition 4). On the other hand (no. 7, Proposition 10), the com-
position of the canonical homomorphisms

&lt;J/:P (8) A P (N) -&gt; A(P) ® A(N) -&gt; A(M)
is injective. The mapping ^ o ^ is therefore injective, whence the proposition.

Theorem 2. Let M be an A-module with a finite basis (^f)i&lt;i&lt; n . For a sequence
(*i)i=si«n °fn elements ofM to form a basis ofM, it is necessary and sufficient that
the element X e A such that

(23) x x A x 2 A ... A x n = X.^i A e 2 A • • • A e n

be invertible in A.

Recall that e x A e 2 A • • • A £„ is the unique element of a basis of A"(M)
(no. 8, Corollary 1 to Theorem 1) so that the element X £ A satisfying (23) is
determined uniquely. If (x t ) 1&lt;l&lt;n is a basis of M, ^ A x 2 A • • • A # n is the
unique element in a basis of A"(M) (no. 8), then X is invertible. Conversely,
suppose X is invertible; then the alternating w-linear form /corresponding to
the linear mapping g: A n (M) -&gt; A such that

£(&lt;?i A e 2 A • • • A e n ) = X- 1

is such that/^, x 2 ,...,x n ) = 1. For all xeM, obviously

JtA^A • • • A x n =

521



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(no. 3, Proposition 6) ; applying no. 8, Corollary 3 to Theorem 1, we obtain

/(*!, * 2 , . . . , x n ) . x = Z ( - l) i-1 /(*, *!,...,*,,..., * n ) .Xt.

As f{x x , . . .,x n ) = 1, this shows that every #eM is a linear combination
of x lt x 2 , . . ., x n and, as the latter are linearly independent (since

#i A x 2 A • • • A x n # 0),

they form a basis of M.

§ 8. DETERMINANTS

1. DETERMINANTS OF AN ENDOMORPHISM

Let M be an A-module with a. finite basis of n elements and u an endomorphism
of M. The A-module A n (M) is a monogenous free module, that is isomorphic
to A (no. 8, Corollary 1 to Theorem 1); A n (u) is an endomorphism of this
module and is therefore a homothety z\^\z of ratio X e A determined unique-
ly (II, § 2, no. 3, Proposition 5).

Definition 1. The determinant of an endomorphism u of a free A-module M of
finite dimension n (II, § 7, no. 2, Corollary to Proposition 3 and Remark 1),
denoted by det u, is the scalar X such that A n («) is the homothety of ratio X.

By formula (4) of § 7, no. 2, det u is the unique scalar such that

(1) Hfo) A u(x 2 ) A • • • A u(x n ) = (det u).Xx A x 2 A • • • A*,

for every sequence (x t ) 1&lt;i&lt;n o£n elements of M. If det(u) = 1, u is said to be
unimodular.

Proposition 1. (i) If u and v are two endomorphisms of a finite-dimensional free
A-module M, then

(2) det(w o v) = (det u) (det v).

(ii) det(l M ) = I; for every automorphism uofM, det u is invertible in A and

(3) * detfa- 1 ) = (deta)" 1 .

If n is the dimension of M, this follows immediately from the relation
A n (« o v) = (A») o (A&gt;)) § 7, no. 2, formula (3)).

Let M be a free A-module with a finite basis (&lt;0i&lt;i&lt;„; given a sequence
(*i)i«i«n °f n elements of M, the determinant of this sequence with respect to

522



AUTOMORPHISMS OF A FINITE-DIMENSIONAL FREE MODULE § 8.2

the given basis (*,), denoted by det(* x , x 2 , . ■ ., # n ) when no confusion can arise
over the basis, is the determinant of the endomorphism u of M such that
m(^) = * 4 for 1 s% i &lt; n. Then by formula (1)

(4) #! A * 2 A • • • A x n = det(* l5 x 2 , . . ., x n ) e t A e 2 A • • • A e n

and this relation characterizes the mapping (*,) h&gt; det(%, x 2i . . . , # n ) of M n
into A. It shows that this mapping is an alternating n-linearform. As, by virtue of
§ 7, no. 4, Proposition 7, the A-module of alternating n-linear forms is canoni-
cally isomorphic to the dual of A n (M) and A"(M) is isomorphic to A, it is
seen that every alternating n-linearform on M n can be ivritten

(*i&gt; ...,*»)&gt;-* a det(x 1} x 2i . . . , * n )
for some a g A.

Proposition 2. Let M be a free A-module with a finite basis (^)i&lt;i &lt;n and v an
endomorphism ofM.. For every sequence (^)i&lt;j&lt; n ofn elements o/"M,

(5) det^xO, . . . , »(*„)) = (det »)det(x x , ...,*„).

If « is the endomorphism of M such that u{e^) = x { for all i, then

and (5) therefore follows from (2).

2. CHARACTERIZATION OF AUTOMORPHISMS OF A FINITE-DIMEN-
SIONAL FREE MODULE

Theorem 1. Let M be a finite-dimensional free A-module and u an endomorphism

o/*M. The following conditions are equivalent:

(a) u is bijective;

(b) u is right invertible (II, § 1, no. 9, Corollary 1 to Proposition 15);

(c) u is left invertible (II, § 1, no. 9, Corollary 2 to Proposition 15);

(d) u is surjective;

(e) det u is invertible in A.

Let («i)i &lt;ia bea basis of M. If x t = u(e t ) for 1 ^ i ^ n, then

*i A x 2 A • • • A x n = (det u)e x A e 2 A • • • A e n .

By § 7, no. 9, Theorem 2 a necessary and sufficient condition for the x { to
form a basis of M is that det u be an invertible element of A; this proves
the equivalence of (a) and (e). Observe that (a) obviously implies each of
conditions (b), (c) and (d); it remains to prove that each of conditions (b),
(c) and (d) implies (e). Now, if there exists an endomorphism v of M such that
v°u = l M orao»= 1 M} then (det »)(det u) = 1 and hence det u is invert-
ible in A. If u is surjective, so is A n (w) (§ 7, no. 2, Proposition 3), in other words

523



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

the homothety of ratio det u in A is surjective, which immediately implies that
det m is invertible.

Proposition 3. Let M be a finite-dimensional free A-module. For every endomorphism
u ofM., the following conditions are equivalent:

(f) u is injective;

(g) det u is not a divisor of zero in A.

With the same notation as in the proof of Theorem 1, for u to be injec-
tive, it is necessary and sufficient that the x t be linearly independent. By
§ 7, no. 9, Proposition 12, it is necessary and sufficient for this that the relation
X#! A x 2 A • • • A x n = (with X e A) imply X = 0. But this is equivalent
to X(det u) = since e 1 A • • • A e n is a basis of A n (M) ; whence the proposi-
tion.

Remark. When A is a field, condition (e) of Theorem 2 is equivalent to condi-
tion (g) of Proposition 3, since they both mean that det u ^ 0. In this case
therefore all the conditions of Theorem 1 and Proposition 3 are equivalent
(cf. II, § 7, no. 4, Corollary to Proposition 9).

3. DETERMINANT OF A SQUARE MATRIX

Definition 2. Let I be a finite set, A a commutative ring and X a square matrix of
type (I, I) over the ring A (II, § 10, no. 7). The determinant of the endomorphism
u of the A-module A 1 , whose matrix with respect to the canonical basis of A 1 is X, is
called the determinant of X and denoted by det X.

IfZ = (£ iy ) (U)eIXI and (^) (eI is the canonical basis of A 1 , the endomorphism
u is then given by

u ( e t) = fe, Zift-

When I = (1, ») c N, if we write x t - u(e t ) for i e I, the determinant of
X is then defined in the relation

(6) x 1 A x 2 A • • • A x n = (det X)e x A e 2 A • • • A e n

in other words, detZ is equal to the determinant det(^ x , x 2 , . . ., x n ) with
respect to the canonical basis of A\ Consequently:

Proposition 4. For n vectors x^.-.^n ofA n , let X(x 1} . . ., x n ) denote the square
matrix of order n whose i-th column is x t for 1 ^ i ^ n. Then the mapping

(*!, ...,*„)•-»' det(JT(*i, ...,*»)
of (A n ) n into A is alternating and n-linear.

In particular, the determinant of a matrix two of whose columns are
equal is zero. If a permutation is performed on the columns of a matrix,

524



DETERMINANT OF A SQUARE MATRIX



§8.3



the determinant of the new matrix is equal to that of the old multiplied
by s„. If to one column of a matrix is added a scalar multiple of a column
of a different index, the determinant of the new matrix is equal to that of
the old.

More generally, let M be a free A-module of finite dimension n and let
( e i)iei be a basis of M; for every automorphism u of M, if X is the matrix of
u with respect to the basis (e t ) s then



(7)



det(«) = det(Z)



as follows immediately from the definitions.
When I = (1, n), the determinant of X is also denoted by

det(2* tf ) 1&lt;J&lt;n&gt;1&lt; /&lt;„

or simply det(£ w ) if this causes no confusion, or also

in si2 • • • £m



£ai I



22



I2



'snl £n2 • • • £nn

When X = 1, the matrix X is called unimodular.



Examples. (1) The determinant of the empty matrix is equal to 1; the
determinant of a square matrix of order 1 is equal to the unique element
of this matrix. For a matrix of order 2



(!" T)

\&lt;»21 &lt;s22/



then, in the above notation,

#1 A #2 = (£ll*l + £21*2) A (£l2*l + ?22«2) = ?ll?22^1 A e 2 + ?2l5l2*2 A «i

whence

c c

_ - = £ll£22 ~" S12?21'

^21 ^22

We translate into the language of matrices some of the results of nos. 1 and
2:

Proposition 5. If X and Y are two square matrices over a commutative ring A with
the same finite indexing set, then



(8)



det(XY) = (detZ)(det7).



525



HI TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

For X to be invertible, it is necessary and sufficient that det X be an invertible element
of A, and then

(9) de^X" 1 ) = (detZ)" 1 .

This follows immediately from no. 1, Proposition 1 and no. 2, Theorem 1.
Corollary. Two similar square matrices have equal determinants.

If P is an invertible square matrix, then dct(PXP " x ) = det X by (8) and

(9).

Proposition 6. For the columns of a square matrix X of finite order to be linearly
independent, it is necessary and sufficient that det X be not a divisor of zero in A.

This follows from no. 2, Proposition 3.

4. CALCULATION OF A DETERMINANT

Lemma 1. Let A be a commutative ring and M a free A-module with a basis (ej) jeJi
where the indexing set J is totally ordered. For every integer p &lt; Card (J), every
alternating p-linear function /:M P -&gt;N (where N is an A-module) and every family

ofp elements # t = 2« ^^ o/"M (1 &lt; i ^ p),

(10) f(xi,x 2 ,... 3 x p )

where (jk)i**k*zp runs through the set of strictly increasing sequences ofp elements of J.
Now

f(x lt ...,x p ) = 2, \ iXt x l JZt 2 . . . l h , P f{e h , e j2 , ..., e t )

(7fc)

where (j k )i &lt;k &lt;p runs through all the sequences of p elements of J; it then
suffices to apply Corollary 1 to Proposition 7 of § 7, no. 4 to/.

In particular, if J is finite and has n elements and x { = Z, £ yi ^ (1 &lt; i &lt; n)
are n elements of M, then

(11) x x A # 2 A ••• A # tt

= ( ^ n e a5; 0(1 ),iS/a(2),2 • • •£/„(„&gt;, «K A e j2 A • • • A e jn

where Uk)i&lt;k&lt;n is me unique sequence of the n elements of J arranged in
increasing order, whence

(12) det(* 1} X 2 , . • • , *„) = ^ s s a • ^a (1) , l^a(2). 2 • • • £/„(„), n-

526



CALCULATION OF A DETERMINANT § 8.4

With the notation of Lemma 1, comparing formulae (10) and (12) gives

(13) «iA* 2 A • • • A x p = 2, det(* H&gt;1 , * H ,2&gt; • • -, *h,p)%

where 5 P (J) is the set of subsets of J with p elements and, for every subset
H e $ P (J), we write x H ,i = 2^ ^ and e B = e h A e i2 A • • • A e ip , Ofc)i &lt;fc&lt; „
being the sequence of elements of H arranged in increasing order, it being
understood that det(# H&gt; u . . . , * H , p) is taken with respect to the basis (e Jle )i &lt;k&lt;p .

Proposition 7. Let I be a finite set and X = (£&gt;{)«, oeixi « square matrix of type
(I, I) ozw a commutative ring A. 7%£»

(14) detjr = ^ /o (riu,.)

where a runs through the group © z of permutations of I and e a is the signature of a
(I, §5, no. 7).

Attention may be confined to the case where I = (1, n) &lt;= N and it then
suffices to apply formula (12), where (e t )i &lt;i&lt;n 1S the canonical basis of A"
and the #, are the columns of X (cf. no. 3, formula (6)).

In particular, for the determinant of a matrix of order 3

(Cll 5l2 5l3\
?21 £22 ?23 I
?31 £32 £33/

we have

det(X) = 5li?22S33 + ^12^23^31 + 521?32?13

~~ S13?22S31 ~~ S12?21S33 ~" ^11^23?32-

Proposition 8. For every square matrix X over a commutative ring, the determinant
of the transpose matrix *X is equal to the determinant of X.

Suppose that X is of type (I, I). For every ordered pair of permutations
a, t of 6u (since multiplication is commutative)

In particular take t = cr" 1 ; using the fact that s a -i = e a , it is seen that

(15) det*= 2^.(0 &gt;,«„),

which proves the proposition.

527



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Corollary 1. For n vectors x 1} . . ., x n of A n , let Y(x 1} . . ., x n ) denote the square
matrix of order n whose i-th row is x t ,for 1 &lt; z &lt; n. Then the mapping

(*i» • • • &gt; *n) •-»• det(F(* 1} ...,x n )
from (A n ) n to A is alternating and n-linear.

Corollary 2. For a square matrix X of finite order over a commutative ring A the
following conditions are equivalent:

(i) the rows of X are linearly independent;

(ii) the columns ofX are linearly independent;

(iii) det X is not a divisor of zero in A.

This follows immediately from no. 3, Proposition 6 and Proposition 8
above.

Corollary 3. Let u be an endomorphism of a finite-dimensional free A-module M
and % u the transpose endomorphism of the dual M* (II, § 2, no. 5, Definition 5) ;
then

(16) det(*u) = det(tt).

If X is the matrix of u with respect to a basis of M, *X is the matrix of *u
with respect to the dual basis (II, § 10, no. 4, Proposition 3) ; as det(w) = det(Z)
and det(*M) = det('X), the conclusion follows from Proposition 8.

5. MINORS OF A MATRIX

Let X be a rectangular matrix (?iy)(ij )e ixj of type (I, J) whose indexing sets
I and J are totally ordered. If H &lt;=■ I and KcJ are finite subsets with the
same number p of elements, there exists a unique increasing bijection § : H -&gt; K
(Set Theory, III, § 5, no. 3, Proposition 6) ; we shall denote by X BtK the square
matrix of type (H, H) equal to (£i, &lt;]&gt;(•)) (i.^shxh- If the elements of X belong to
a commutative ring A, the determinant det(^T HK ) is called the minor of the
matrix X of indices H, K; these determinants (for all ordered pairs (H, K)
of subsets of I and J respectively with p elements) are also called the minors
of X of order p. With this notation:

Proposition 9. Let M be an A-module with a basis (^)t € j (finite or otherwise)
whose indexing set J is totally ordered. For every integer p &gt; 0, let (%)Hes P (j) be the
corresponding basis of A P (M) (§ 7, no. 8). Let (Xi) 1&lt;i&lt;p bea sequence ofp elements of
M; let

* { = Z, £,,*, for iel = (l,/&gt;)

528



MINORS OF A MATRIX § 8.5

and let X denote the matrix (£ y( ) of type (J, I). Then

(17) *iA^A-A* P = He ^ 3) (detX H&gt;i y H .
where H runs through the set ftp (J) of subsets of J with p elements.

This follows immediately from formula (12) of no. 4 and formula (6) of
no. 3.

Proposition 10. Let M and N be two free A-modules of respective dimensions m
and n, u : M — *- N a linear mapping and X the matrix of u with respect to a basis
( e t)i&lt;t&lt;m °/M and a basis (^)i&lt;y&lt; n ofN. Then, for every integer p ^ inf(m, n), the
matrix of A P (w) with respect to the basis (%)k60 p (d °f A P (M) and the basis
C/h)h68 p (J) °f A P (N) {where we have written I = (1, m) and J = (1, n) is the
matrix (det(Z HK )) of type (ft p (J), $ P (I)) (and hence with II rows and I J

columns).

For a subset K cz J with/&gt; elements, let (jk)i^k&lt;p De the sequence of ele-
ments of K arranged in increasing order; by definition of /\ p (w), by § 7, no. 2,
formula (4)

A P («)(%) = «(* yi ) A u{e j2 ) A • • • A « («,,).

Hence the element of the matrix of A p (m) which is in the row of index H
and the column of index K is the component of index H of the element
u ( e h) A • • • A u(e fp ); it is therefore equal to det(X H K ) by Proposition 9.

The matrix (det(X HK )) is called the p-th exterior power of the matrix X and
is denoted by A P (X). When/&gt; = m = n, A n (X) is the matrix with the single
element det(Z).

Proposition 11. Let M be a free A-module of finite dimension n; for every endo-
morphism uofyi and every ordered pair of elements £, r\ of A,

(18) det(£l M + V) = fc 2 Tr(A*(8))5-y.

Let («t)i&lt;i&lt;n be a basis of M and let I = (1, n); to calculate the left hand
side of (18), we must form the product

(5*1. + v)«(*i)) A (&amp;? 2 + &gt;l»(«a)) A • • • A (5«„ + i)«(«»))

which is equal to the sum of the terms ^ n ~ p ri p z K , where

z K = x x A x 2 A - ■ • A x n

with Xi = u(e t ) for i e K, x t = e { for t £ H = I - K, where the integer p
runs through the interval (0, n) and, for each p, K runs through the set of

529



in TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

subsets of I with/» elements. If* x &lt; i 2 &lt; • • • &lt; i n _ p (resp.ji &lt; j 2 &lt; • • • &lt; j p )
are the elements of H (resp. K) arranged in increasing order, we can write
(§ 7, no. 8, Corollary 1 to Theorem 1 and formula (19))

Z K = Ph.k*1i A e h A • • • A *,„_„ A u(e h ) A • • • A u{e ]p ).

But if AT is the matrix of u with respect to the basis (* t ), then by Proposition 10

u{e h ) A ••• A u{e ip ) = h 2^ (detZ L , K )^

and hence

z k = Ph,k L6 ^ (I) (detZ L)K )^ H A e w

Now HnL^ except for L = K; it therefore follows from § 7, no. 8,
formula (20) that z K = (detX KtK )e x A e 2 A • • • A e n and formula (18) then
follows from Proposition 10 and the definition of the trace of a matrix (II,
§ 10, no. 11, formulae (49) and (50)).

Corollary. Under the same hypotheses as in Proposition 11, for the endomorphism
A(«) of the A-module A(M)

(19) Tr(A(w)) = det(l M + «).

It suffices to replace £ and yj by 1 in (18) and observe that the matrix of
A(u) with respect to the basis of the e a (H £5(1)) is the diagonal matrix of
the matrices of the A k (u) for ^ k (II, § 10, no. 7, Example IV).

6. EXPANSIONS OF A DETERMINANT

Let I be a totally ordered finite indexing set. For every subset H of I let H'
denote the complement I — H. Let X = (% n ) be a square matrix of type
(I, I), which can be considered as the matrix of an endomorphism u of M = A 1
with respect to the canonical basis (^) te i of M. Let n = Card(I) and let H
be a subset of I with q s% n elements and K a subset of I with n — q elements;
then we can write (no. 5, Proposition 10)



(A'( M ))M=2det(Z R&gt;H K
(A n - q (u))(e K ) =2det(X s , K )* s



where R (resp. S) runs through the set of subsets of I with q (resp. n — q)
elements. It follows from § 7, no. 8, formulae (19) and (20) that

e n A e s =
530



EXPANSIONS OF A DETERMINANT § 8.6

except when S = R', whence the formula

(20) (A»(%)) A (A*"»(%)) = 2 Pb.b- dettXH^detpr^K

where R runs through the set 5 g (I) of subsets of I with q elements.

If we take K = H', it follows from the definition of A n (w) (§ 7, no. 2, for-
mula (4)) and § 7, no. 3, Corollary 1 to Proposition 5 that the right hand side
of (20) is p H H'A n (tt)(*i)- Hence (no. 1, formula (1) and §7, no. 2, formula

(4))

(21) det(Z) = p H&gt;H . 2 . p RjR , det(X K ,H)det(Jr B . &gt;H &lt;)-

If on the other hand K ^ H', then HnK^ ; as the left hand side of
(20) is ±/\(u)(e B A %), it is zero, whence

(22) 2 p R , R , det(X B&gt;H )det(X R ,, K ) =0 for K # H\

The right hand side of (21) is called the Laplace expansion of the determinant
of the matrix X by the q columns whose indices belong to H and the n — q columns
whose indices belong to the complement H' of H. The minors det(X R H ) and
det(X B » &gt;H /) are sometimes called complementary.

An important simple case of the Laplace expansion is that where I = (1, n)
and &lt;7=1, hence H = {i}; for every subset R = {j} of I with one element
then det X BH = £ yi . The minor of det X w , H ' is the determinant of the square
matrix derived canonically (no. 5) from the matrix obtained by suppressing
in X the row of indexj and the column of index i. We denote this square matrix
by X». Obviously p H&gt;H , = (-1)'" 1 and p B&gt;B . = (-1)'" 1 ; therefore (21)
becomes in this case

(23) detZ = 2 (-l)' + &gt;$ yi det(X&gt;&lt;)
and we obtain similarly from (22)

n

(24) 2 x ( - \)% t det(X' fc ) =0 for k * i.

Formula (23) is known as the expansion of the determinant of X by the column
of index i. The scalar ( — 1) 1+ &gt; det(Z yi ) is called the cof actor of indices.;' and i
(or, by an abuse of language, the cofactor of £") in X.

The matrix of cof actors of X is the matrix

(25) Y= ((-l) J+ 'det(X*))



531



Ill



TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS



whose element in the j-th row and «-th column is the cofactor of indices j
and i. Formulae (23) and (24) are equivalent to the formula



(26)
Therefore:



*Y.X = (detX)/ n .



Proposition 12. For every irwertible square matrix X of type (n,n), the inverse of
X is given by the formula

(27) X~ x = (detX)- 1 .^

where Y is the cofactor matrix of X.

By considering the transpose of X and using Proposition 8 of no. 5, the Lap-
lace expansions could be obtained relative to two complementary sets of rows
and, in particular, the expansion of det X by a row, thus there are formulae
equivalent to



(28)



X. t Y= (detZ)/ n



in the above notation.

It is easily verified that if X is the matrix of an endomorphism u of a free
A-module M of dimension n with respect to a basis (*i)i&lt;i«„, *Y is the matrix
of the endomorphism u of M denned by the following condition: for every
set of n elements x, y 2 , • ■ • , y n of M,

u{x) A y 2 A • • • A y n = x A u(y 2 ) A • • • A u(y n ).

u is called the cotranspose of u (cf. §11, no. 1 1, Corollary to Proposition 13).

Examples. (1) Vandermonde determinant. Given a sequence (£i)i«;i&lt;n °f n ele-
ments of A, the Vandermonde determinant of this sequence is the determinant



V(Cx^ 25 ...^ n ) =



We shall show that

(29) V(^,C 2 ,... 5 Cn)=ri(^-g.

Since the proposition is immediate for n = 1, we argue by induction on n.
532



1


1


1


Si


K 2 ■


• Kn


3


C 2 ■


• E


yn- 1

SI


yn- 1
S2


yn- 1
Sn



EXPANSIONS OF A DETERMINANT



§8.6



For each index k ^ 2, we subtract from the row of index k the row of
index k — 1 multiplied by Ci&gt; th e value of the determinant is unaltered
and hence



v(Ci,C 2 ,...,C B )



l l

C 2 (C 2 ~C0



1

d-d

Cn(C» " CO



o cr 2 (C 2 -C0



G" a (C - CO



whence, expanding by the first column and then taking out the factor C fc — Ci
from the column of index k — 1 from the minor thus obtained (2 &lt; k ^ n)

V(C l5 • • ., Cn) = (C 2 - C0(d - CO • • • (C„ - C0^(C 2 , • • ., Cn)

which establishes (29) by induction.

(2) Consider a square matrix of order n which is presented in the form of
an "upper triangular matrix of matrices" (II, § 10, no. 7, Example IV)



We show that
(30)



'-C 3



detZ= (det F) (det Z).



Let n be the order of the matrix X, h that of Y, (ei) 1&lt;i&lt;n the canonical
basis of A n and x t (1 ^ i ^ n) the columns of X; the hypothesis implies that
the columns x 1 ,... i x h belong to the submodule of A n with basis e lt . . . , e h
and then by definition (no. 3, formula (6))

*i A # 2 A ' ' ' A x h = (det Y)e x Ae 2 A • • • A e h .

On the other hand, for every index i &gt; h, we can write x t = y i + z t ,
where y x is a linear combination of e ly e 2 ,...,e h and z, is a linear combination
of e h + 1 , . . ., e n . By (30), x x A x 2 A • • • A * ft A y t = for all i &gt; h, there-
fore

*i A # 2 A • • • A * n = (det Y)e x A tf 2 A • • • A * ft A z h + 1 A • • • A z n .

But by definition

z h+i A z ft+ 2 A • • • A z n = (det Z)&lt;? ft+1 A &lt;? ft + 2 A • • • A e n

whence formula (30).



533



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

By induction on p, it follows that if X is of the form of an upper triangular
matrix of matrices:



0.

(31) det X = (det X 1X ) (det X 22 ) . . . (det X pp ).

This can be applied in particular to a triangular matrix (where all the X ti
are of order 1) and more particularly to a diagonal matrix:

(32) det(diag(a l5 a 2 , . . ., a n )) = a x a 2 . . . a R .

(3) Let M, M' be two free A-modules of respective dimensions n, re', u an
endomorphism of M and u' an endomorphism of M'. Then

(33) det(w (g&gt; u') = (det «) n '(det u')\

For we can write u &lt;g&gt; u' = (u &lt;g&gt; 1 M &gt;) o (1 M (g) u') and are then led to the
case where one of the two endomorphisms u, u' is the identity. For example if
u' = 1 M , and X is the matrix of u with respect to a basis (e t ) of M, then the
matrix of u (g&gt; 1 M , with respect to the tensor product of (e t ) and a basis of M'
can be written as a matrix (with n' rows and n' columns) of matrices with
n rows and n columns

(X ...

X ...



t ... X)
whence, by virtue of Example 2,

det(M ® 1 M ') = (detZ) n ' = (detw)*'
which immediately gives formula (33).

7. APPLICATION TO LINEAR EQUATIONS

Consider a system of n scalar linear equations in n unknowns over a (com-
mutative) ring A (II, § 2, no. 8) :



TO

(34) 2 X^, = *)i (1 &lt; « &lt; »)■



i = l

534



APPLICATION TO LINEAR EQUATIONS § 8.7

Let L be the square matrix (X, y ) of order n; by identifying as usual the matrix
with one column consisting of the \ x (resp. the vj,) with an element x — (5 4 )
of A n (resp. the element y = (tjj) of A n ), system (34) may also be written
(II, § 10, no. 3, Proposition 2)

(35) L.x = y.

Let u be the endomorphism x t-*&gt; L.x of A n , with L as matrix with respect
to the canonical basis; to say that equation (35) has (at least) one solution
for all yeA n means that u is surjective; Theorem 1 of no. 2 then implies the
following proposition:

Proposition 13. For a system ofn linear equations in n unknowns over a commutative
ring to admit at least one solution regardless of the right hand sides, it is necessary and
sufficient that the determinant of the matrix of the system be invertible; in this case the
system admits a single solution.

If det L is not a divisor of zero in A, equation (34) is equivalent to the equa-
tion

(detZ,)!,.* = (det L)y.

If M is the cofactor matrix of L, we derive from (34) and formula (26) of
no. 6 the relation

(36) (det L)x = t M.y
which may also be written

n

(37) (det L) li = 2 ( - 1 Y + '(det L")% = det L\ ( 1 &lt; i &lt; n)

where L x denotes the matrix obtained by replacing the column of L of index
i by y. Formulae (37) are called Cramer's formulae for system (34) ; every solu-
tion of (34) is also a solution of (37). Conversely, we derive from (36), taking
account of formula (28) of no. 6,

(38) (det L) (L.x -y) =

and hence, if det L is not a divisor of zero in A, systems (34) and (37) are
equivalent; if det L is invertible, the unique solution of (34) is given by

(39) 5, = (det^-^detZ,) (1 &lt; i ^ n).

A system (34) such that det L is invertible is also called a Cramer system.

In particular lety = 0; it then follows from Proposition 3 of no. 2 that:

Proposition 14. For a homogeneous linear system of n equations in n unknowns
over a commutative ring to admit a non-zero solution, it is necessary and sufficient that
the determinant of its matrix be a divisor of zero.

535



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

8. CASE OF A COMMUTATIVE FIELD

All the above applies when the ring A is a commutative field; but there are
simplifications and additional results.
Thus Proposition 12 of § 7, no. 9 can be formulated in this case as follows:

Proposition 15. Let E be a vector space over a commutative field; for p vectors
x t eE (1 ^ i ^ p) to be linearly independent, it is necessary and sufficient that
*i A # 2 A • ' • A x p t* 0.

Corollary. Let X be a matrix of type (m, n) over a commutative field. The rank
of X is equal to the greatest integer p such that there exists at least one minor of X of
order p which is =£0.

The rank of Xh the maximum number of linearly independent columns of
X (II, § 10, no. 12, Definition 7). The corollary then follows from Proposition
15 and formula (17) of no. 5.

Consider now the case of a system of m linear equations in n unknowns over a
commutative field K:

n

(41) 2 x XyS, = y ll (1 &lt; i ^ m).

Proposition 16. Let L = (Xj y ) be the matrix {of type (m,n)) of system (41). Let
M be the matrix of type (m,n+ 1) obtained by adding to L the (n + \)-th column
(irjj) (II, § 10, no. 1). Let p be the rank of L {calculated by applying the Corollary to
Proposition 15). Suppose that the minor AofL, the determinant of the matrix by sup-
pressing the rows and columns of index ~^p + 1 in L, is ^0 {which is always possible
by means of a suitable permutation on the rows of L and a suitable permutation on the
columns of L). Then, for system (41) to have at least one solution it is necessary and
sufficient that all the minors of order p + 1 of M, the determinants of the submatrices
of order p + 1 of M whose columns have indices 1, 2, . . .,p and n + 1, be zero.
If this is so, the solutions of system (41) are those of the system consisting of the first
p equations; if they are written

(42) X \&amp; = v], - k 2 +i X ifc £ fc (1 &lt; f &lt; p)

all the solutions of this system are obtained by taking for the £ fc of index k &gt; p arbi-
trary values and applying Cramer's formulae (no. 7, formulae (37)) to calculate the
%, of index j ^ p.

We know (II, § 10, no. 12, Proposition 12) that for the system (41) to have
at least one solution, it is necessary and sufficient that the matrices L and M
have the same rank. With the rows and columns of L permuted to satisfy the

536



THE UNIMODULAR GROUP SL(ft, A) § 8.9

condition of the statement, let c t (1 ^ i &lt; p) denote the first p columns of
L and y = (-ty) the (n + \)-th column of M ; since all the columns of L are
by hypothesis linear combinations of the a it to say that M has the same rank
p as L means thaty is a linear combination of the o 4 , or also (Proposition 15)
that a x A • • • A a p A y = 0. The possibility condition in the statement is
the translation of the latter relation, taking account of formula (17) of no. 5.
Moreover, since the first p rows of M are linearly independent, the rows of
index &gt;p are linear combinations of them and hence every solution of (42) is
also a solution of (41). The last assertion is then an immediate consequence of
Proposition 13 of no. 7.

9. THE UNIMODULAR GROUP SL(n, A)

Let M„(A) denote the ring of square matrices of order n over A. Consider the
mapping det:M n (A) -&gt; A. The group GL(«, A) of invertible elements of
M n (A) (isomorphic to the group of automorphisms of the A-module A n (II,
§ 10, no. 7)) is just the inverse image under this mapping of the multiplicative
group A* of invertible elements of A (no. 3, Proposition 5). Note on the other
hand that the mapping det: GL(«, A) -&gt; A* is a group homomorphism (no. 3,
Proposition 5).

The mapping det:M n (A) -&gt; A is moreover surjective (and therefore so is
the homomorphism det:GL(«, A) -&gt; A*) ; since, for all X e A,

det(diag(X, 1, . . ., 1)) = X

by virtue of formula (32) of no. 6.

The kernel of the surjective homomorphism det:GL(n, A) -&gt; A* is a normal
subgroup of GL(«, A), which is composed of unimodular matrices; it is denoted
by SL n (A) or SL(ra, A) and is often called the unimodular group or special linear
group of square matrices of order n over A.

In this no. we shall examine the case where A is a field. Recall that for
1 ^ t &lt; n, 1 &lt; j &lt; ft, E if denotes the square matrix of order n all of whose
elements are zero except the one in the row of index i and the column of index
j, which is equal to 1 ; with I n denoting the unit matrix of order ft, we write
B i} (k) = I n + "kEij for every ordered pair of distinct indices i,j and all X e A
(II, § 10, no. 13).

Proposition 17. Let K be a commutative field. The unimodular group SL(ft, K) is
generated by the matrices B i} (\) with i ^ j and X e K.

By II, § 10, no. 13, Proposition 14, we know that every matrix in GL(«, K)
is a product of matrices of the form i? w (X) and a matrix of the form
diag(l, 1, . . ., 1, a) with a eK*. Now it is immediate that det(i? w (X)) = 1
and det (diag(l, . . ., 1, a)) = a (no. 6, Example 2); whence the proposition.

537



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Corollary. The group SL(n, K) is the group of commutators ofGL(n, K), except
in the case where n = 2 and where K is afield with 2 elements.

As SL(n, K) is the kernel of the homomorphism det of GL(«, K) to a commu-
tative group K*, SL(n, K) contains the commutator group T of GL(n, K)
(I, § 6, no. 2). To prove that SL(n, K) = F, it will suffice, by Proposition 17,
to show that, for all X e K*, 2? W (X) belongs to T. Now, 2? W (X) is a conjugate of
B v {\) in GL(ra, K) since 5 tf (X) = Q.B tj (l) ,Q~\ where Q denotes the matrix
with respect to the canonical basis (* t ) of the automorphism v of K ft such that
v(e t ) = X*j, v{e k ) = e k for k ^ i. On the other hand, let u u (for i =£ j) be the
automorphism of K n such that u i} {e^ = —e jy « tf («y) = e i} u tj (e k ) = e k for
k${i,j}, which belongs to SL(n, K); then -B yi (X) = U ti B ti ( — 'k)U i 'i 1 t where
£/ w is the matrix of u Ki with respect to the canonical basis. Similarly, if 1 &lt; i &lt; j,
then jB w (X) = U lx B i} {-K)U^ x and finally, for 2 &lt;j, 5 12 (X) = U^B^^U^ 1 .
This proves that all the i? w (X) have the same image s in GL(w, K)/r and it re-
mains to show that s is the identity element.

Suppose first that K contains an element X distinct from and 1 ; then
1 = X + (1 — X), the two terms on the right hand side being #0; the relation
-#12(1) — -^12(^)^12(1 — X) shows that s 2 = s and hence s is the identity ele-
ment.

Suppose now that n ^ 3. The product B 21 (l)B 31 (l) is the matrix of an
automorphism u of K n such that u{e{) = e ± + e 2 + e 3) u(e t ) = e t for i # 1. If
S is the matrix of the automorphism u' of K n such that u'{e 2 ) = e 2 + e 3 ,
u'fa) = e { for i # 2, then S.B 21 (l)B 31 (l) .S -1 = B 21 (l); we also deduce that
s 2 = s, which completes the proof.

Remarks. (1) GL(2, F 2 ) = SL(2, F 2 ) ; this is a solvable group of order 6, whose
commutator group is of index 2 (II, § 10, Exercise 14).

(2) With the same notation as above, it can be proved as in I, § 5, no. 7,
Proposition 9 that, for i &lt; j, j — i &gt; 1, u u = Uj_ 1} ju u j.^/Ji^; hence the
group SL(n, K) is generated by the matrices B 12 ("k) and U iti+1 for 1 ^ i ^ n — 1.

10. THE A[X]-MODULE ASSOCIATED WITH AN A-MODULE ENDOMOR-
PHISM

Let M be an A-module and u an endomorphism of M. Consider the poly-
nomial ring A[X] in one indeterminate X over A. For every polynomial
p e A[X] and all x e M, we write

(43) p.x=p(u)(x).

As (pq)(u) = p{y) o q(u) for two polynomials p, q of A[X], and A[X]-module
structure is thus defined on M; the set M, with this structure, will be denoted
by M u ; the A-module structure given on M is obtained by restricting the ring
of operators of M u to A. Note that the submodules of M u are just the submodules
of M which are stable under u.

538



THE A[X] -MODULE ASSOCIATED WITH AN A-MODULE ENDOMORPHISM § 8.10

As the mapping (p,x) ^p.x of A[X] x M into M is A-bilinear, it defines
canonically an A-linear mapping &lt;j&gt;: A[X] A M -&gt; M such that

(44) Hp®x) =p.x=p(u){x).

On the other hand, A[X] ® A M has canonically an A[X]-module structure
(II, §5, no. 1); we shall denote this A[X]-module by M[X]; the mapping
§: M[X] -&gt; M tt is A[X]-linear since, for p, q in A[X] and x e M,

&lt;K*(A® *)) = $((#) ® x ) = (#)•* = ?(") (/&gt;(")(*)) = ?-&lt;K/&gt; ® *)•
Moreover, a is an A[X]-endomorphism of M M , for

u(p.x) = u(p(u)(x)) = (up{x))(x) =p.u{x).
Finally, an A[X]-endomorphism u of M[X] is defined by writing (II, § 5, no. 1)

(45) u{p 0x) =p 0«(*).

Moreover it follows from formulae (44) and (45) that that A[X] -linear
mappings u, u and § are related by the relation

(46) &lt;j&gt; o u = u o &lt;{&gt;.

Let &lt;J/ denote the A[X]-endomorphism X — u of M[X], so that
ty{p &lt;8&gt; *) = (X/&gt;) x — p u(x). We have the following proposition:

Proposition 18. The sequence of A[K\-homomorphisms

(47) M[X] -^&gt; M[X] -±&gt; M u — &gt;

As &lt;{&gt;(1 at) = x for all a; e M, clearly (J) is surjective; on the other hand,

&lt;j&gt;(X(/&gt; ® *)) = X.&lt;|&gt;(/&gt; ® *) = u($(p ® a:)),

in other words, &lt;j)oX = Mo&lt;j) = &lt;j)ofiby (46) ; this proves that &lt;{&gt; o &lt;|; = 0. It
remains to verify that Ker (j&gt; c: Im &lt;\&gt;. For this note that, since the monomials
X fc (k ^ 0) form a basis of the A-module A[X], every element z e M[X] can

be written uniquely in the form z = 2i, X fc x k , where (x k ) is a family of ele-
ments of M, of finite support. If z e Ker &lt;J&gt;, then &lt;j&gt;(z) = ,2, M fc (Ar fc ) = and we
can write

z = 2 (X fc ® x k - 1 ® M fc (* fc )) = 2 (X fc - fi*)(l * fc ).
But as the A[X]-emdomorphisms X and u of M[X] are permutable, then

539



Ill



TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS



X fc — u k = (X — u) o( Z, X / u fc " y_1 1 which proves that there exists a
y e M[X] such that z = ty(y).

Now let M' be another A-module and u' an endomorphism of M'; let M^,
&lt;|&gt;', u", &lt;}/ be the module and mapping obtained from M' and v! as M tt , &lt;f&gt;, u, &lt;J&gt;
are obtained from M and u. Then:

Proposition 19. For a mapping g ofM. into M' to be an A[X.]-homomorphism o/M u
into Mi, it is necessary and sufficient that g be an A-homomorphism of M into M' such
that gou = u' o g. When this is so, if g is the A[X.]-homomorphism of M[X] into
M'[X] equal to l Mxl ® g (II, § 5, no. 1), the diagram



M



(48)



X]



M'[X]



■&gt; M[X] — -&gt; M,



-&gt;



*'



M'[X]



&lt;!&gt;'



■&gt; ML.



-&gt;



is commutative.

The condition g o u = u' °g is obviously necessary by (43) for g to be an
A[X]-homomorphism; it is sufficient, for it implies by induction that
g ou n = u' n o g for every integer n &gt; 0. On the other hand, for all x e M and
all/&gt;eA[X],

V(i(P ® *)) = ¥(P ® *(*)) = /&gt;("') (*(*)) = *(*(«)(*)) = gftiP ® *))

and

which proves the commutativity of diagram (48).

11. CHARACTERISTIC POLYNOMIAL OF AN ENDOMORPHISM

Let M be a free A-module of dimension n and u an endomorphism of M. Con-
sider the polynomial ring in two indeterminates A[X, Y] and the A[X, Y]-
module M[X, Y] = A[X, Y] &lt;g&gt; A M; let u be the endomorphism of the
A[X, YJ-module M[X, Y] canonically derived from u (II, §5, no. 1). It
follows from no. 5, Proposition 1 1 that



(49)



n

det(X - Y5) = 2 (-l)Tr(A'( M ))X»-&gt;Y&gt;



for if U is the matrix of u with respect to a basis (^) i &lt; 4 &lt; n of M, U is the matrix
of u with respect to the basis (1 *i)i«&lt; n of M[X, Y], hence

Tr(A'(5)) = Tr(A'(«)).



540



NORMS AND TRACES RELATIVE TO A MODULE §9.1

Definition 3. Let M be a finite-dimensional free A-module and u an endomorphism
ofM. The determinant of the endomorphism X-ao/ the free A[X]-module M[X]
is called the characteristic polynomial ofu and is denoted by x«(X).

If M is of rank n, it follows from (49) that

n

(50) Xtt (X) = 2(-i)n:r(AV))x-^

for det(X - Yu) = det(X./ n + YU) and det(X - u) = det(X. J n - U). It
is therefore seen that XuQQ is a monic polynomial of degree n, in which the
coefficient of X B-1 is — Tr(u) and the constant term is ( — l) n det(tt).

Proposition 20 ("Cayley-Hamilton theorem"). For every endomorphism u of a
finite-dimensional free A-module, Xu( M ) = 0.

In the notation of Proposition 18 (§3, no. 10), for all xeM, Xu (")(*) is the
image under &lt;j&gt; of Xu(X) (g) x. But if v is the endomorphism of M[X], the co-
transpose of X — u (no. 6), then

Xtt (X) (g&gt; x = X «(X)(1 ® *) = (X - u)(v(l ® x))

and the conclusion follows from Proposition 18 of no. 10.



§ 9. NORMS AND TRACES

Throughout this paragraph, K will denote a commutative ring and A a unital associative
Yx.-algebra. Every A-module will be assumed to be given the K.-module structure obtained
by restricting the scalars to K.

1. NORMS AND TRACES RELATIVE TO A MODULE

Definition 1. Let M be an A-module admitting a finite basis as a TL-module. For all
aeA, let a M be the endomorphism x \-^-ax of the K.-module M. The trace, determinant
and characteristic polynomial ofa M are called respectively the trace, norm and characteristic
polynomial of z relative to M.

The trace and norm of a are therefore elements of K, denoted respectively
by Tr M/K (a) and N M/K (a) ; the characteristic polynomial of a is an element of
K[X], denoted by Pc M/K (a; X). We omit K in the above notation when there
is no risk of confusion.

From the properties of the trace and determinant of an endomorphism (II,
§ 4, no. 3 and § 8, no. 1) we obtain the relations

(1) Tr M (a + a') = Tr M ( fl ) + Tr M ( fl ')

541



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(2) Tr K («0 = Tr M (a'a)

(3) N M K) = N M (a)N M («')

for all a, a' in A.

Let (^i) i &lt; t &lt; n De a basis of the K-module M and (f%(a)) the matrix of the
endomorphism a M with respect to this basis. The functions m i} are linear forms
on the K-module A and

n

(4) Tr M (o) = 2, x *%(«)

(5) N M (a) = detK(a))

(6) Pc(a; X) = det(8 fy X - ro iy (a)).

It follows from the method of calculating a determinant (§ 8, no. 11, formula
(50)) that

(7) Pc M (a; X) = X» + ^X""* + • • • + e %
where

(8) e x = -Tr M (a), c n = (-l) n N M (a).
ForXeK,

(9) Tr M (X) = n.X, N M (X) = X", Pc M (X; X) = (X - X)».

Let K' be a commutative K-algebra. Let M' = K' &lt;g&gt; K M and
A' = K' ® K A, so that M' has an A'-module structure (§ 4, Example 2). As
a K'-module M' admits the basis consisting of the 1 &lt;g) e t (1 ^ i &lt; n) and the
matrix of a M with respect to (e t ) is equal to the matrix of (1 ® a) u , with re-
spect to (e\). Then

Tr M ,(l &lt;g&gt; a) = Tr M (a) . 1, N M ,(1 ® a) = N M (a) . 1

( } Pc M ,(l&lt;g)a;X) = Pc M (a;X).l

for all a e A, where 1 denotes the unit element of K'. If in particular we take
K' = K[X],then

(13) Pc M/K ( fl ; X) = N M[X]/K[X] (X - a).

2. PROPERTIES OF NORMS AND TRACES RELATIVE TO A MODULE

If M and M' are two isomorphic A-modules with finite bases over K, then, for all

aeA,

(14) Tr M ,(a) - Tr M («), N M ,(a) = N M («), Pc M ,(a; X) = Pc M («; X)

for if/is an isomorphism of M onto M', the matrix of a M with respect to a basis
B of M over K is the same as the matrix of a w with respect to the basis/(B) of
M\

542



NORM AND TRACE IN AN ALGEBRA § 9.3

Proposition 1. Let M = M„ =&gt; M x =5 • • • =&gt; M r = {0} fo a decreasing sequence
of submodules of an A-module M such that each of the K-modules P t = M^j/Mj
(1 ^ i &lt; r) oftm'to ajSmfe £o«j. 77t*n ffo K-module M admits a finite basis and

r r

Tr M (a) = 2 Tr P| («) , N M (a) = jTI N P ,(a)

(15) ,

Pc M (a;X) = I = lPc Pi («;X).

Let Bj be a basis of P, over K; then a system of representatives B, of BJ
(mod. Mj) is a basis of a supplementary submodule of the K-module M { in the
K-module M^ (II, § 1, no. 11, Proposition 21). The union B of the B t
(1 ^ i ^ r) is a basis of M over K. Let X ti be the matrix of the endomorphism
a P( with respect to the basis B' t . It is immediate that the matrix of a u with
respect to B is of the form

(X„ X Tfr - X ... X Ttl

X r _ 1)r _j . . . -Ar-l,:



^0 ... X



n



and the proposition follows from formulae (4), (5) and (6) of no. 1 and for-
mula (31) of §8, no. 6.

Proposition 2. Let A, A' be two K-algebras, M an A-module and M' an A! -module.
Suppose that M and M' are free K-modules of respective dimensions n and n' and con-
sider M &lt;g&gt; K M' as an (A ® K A')-module (§ 4, no. 3, Example 2). Then, for aeA
and a' e A',

(16) Tr M ® M (a &lt;g&gt; a') = Tr M (&lt;7)Tr M ,(&lt;z')

(17) N M0M ,(a &lt;g&gt; a') = (N M («))*'(N 1I .(a'))».

Formula (16) follows from II, § 4, no. 4, formula (26) and formula (17) from
§ 8, no. 6, formula (33).

3. NORM AND TRACE IN AN ALGEBRA

Definition 2. Let Abe a K-algebra which is a finite-dimensional free K-module. For
every element aeA, the trace (resp. norm,\ resp. characteristic polynomial) of a
relative to A and Hi is the trace (resp. determinant, resp. characteristic polynomial) of the
endomorphism # ■-&gt; ax of the K-module A.



t This notion should not be confused with the notion for norm in an algebra over
a valued field {General Topology), IX, §3, no. 7).

543



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

The trace, norm and characteristic polynomial of a e A relative to A and K
are denoted by Tr A/K (a), N A/K (a) and Pc A/K (a; X); we omit K and even A
from this notation when there is no risk of confusion. Note that the trace (resp.
norm, characteristic polynomial) of a g A is just the trace (resp. norm, charac-
teristic polynomial) of a relative to the A-module A s .

Suppose that A is the product A T x A 2 x • • • x A m of a finite number
finite-dimensional algebras over K which are free K-modules. Using the above
remark and Proposition 1 of no. 2, we have, for every element

a = («!,. . .,a m ) e A,

m m

Tr A/K (a) = 2 Tr At/K (aO, N A/K (a) = Yl N AilK (a t )
(18)

Pc A/K (a;X) =riPc Aj/K ( fli ;X).

Similarly, Proposition 2 of no. 2 shows that if A and A' are two algebras,
which are free K-modules, of finite dimensions n, ri respectively over K, then,
for aeA, a' e A'.

(19) Tr A ® A ,(a &lt;g&gt; a') = Tr A (a) Tr A ,(a')

(20) N A ® A ,(* ® a') = (N A («))«'(N A ,(a'))*.

Finally let A be a finite-dimensional algebra over K which is a free K-
module, h a homomorphism of K into a commutative ring K' and A' = A (K0
the K'-algebra derived from A by extending the scalars by means of h. It
follows from formula (12) of no. 1 that, for all a e A,

Tr AVK ,(l ® a) = A(Tr A/K (a)), N A7K ,(1 &lt;g&gt; a) = h(N AIK (a))

Pc A7K ,(l a; X) = h(Pc AIK (a; X))

where h is the homomorphism K[X] -&gt; K'[X] derived from h. In particular,
for K' = K[X], we obtain, writing A[X] = A ® K K[X],

(22) Pc A/K (a; X) = N A[X]/K[X] (X - a).

More generally, if K' is a commutative K-algebra and A' = A &lt;g) K K', then,
for all x e A',

Pc A/K (a;*) = N A7K ,(x -a).

Examples. (1) Let A be a quadratic algebra over K of type (a, p) and (e lt e 2 ) a
basis of type (a, p) (§ 2, no. 3). For x = ^e x + t)* 2 , Tr A/K (^) = 2? + (3yj and
N a/ kW = ^ 2 + (3£/J — av) 2 ; these functions are therefore identical with the
Cayley trace and norm of x (§ 2, no. 24).

(2) Let A be a quaternion algebra over K. A direct calculation allows us to

544



PROPERTIES OF NORMS AND TRACES IN AN ALGEBRA § 9.4

verify that Tr A/K (*) = 2T(*) and N A/K (*) = (N(*)) 2 , where T and N are the
Cayley trace and norm (§ 2, no. 4).

(3) Let A = M n (K) and let the canonical basis (E tj ) of A (II, § 10, no. 3) be
arranged in lexicographic order. Then it is immediately seen that for every

matrix X = 2&lt; ^jE tj the matrix (of order n 2 ) of the endomorphism Fi-&gt; AT is

of the form

IX ...

X ...



K ... X)
whence Tr A/K (X) = n.Tr(Z) and N A/K (Z) = (det(Z))».

4. PROPERTIES OF NORMS AND TRACES IN AN ALGEBRA

Proposition 3. Let Abe a K.-algebra admitting a finite basis. For an element aeAto
be invertible, it is necessary and sufficient that its N A/K (a) be invertible in K.

If a admits an inverse a' in A, then

N A/K (a)N A/K (a') = N A/K (aa') = N A/K (1) = 1

by formula (3) of no. 1. Conversely, if N A/K (a) is invertible, the endomorphism
h: x h-&gt; ax is bijective (§ 8, no. 2, Theorem 1). Then there exists a' e A such that
ad = 1; then^(a'a — 1) = aa'a — a = (aa' — \)a = 0, whence ad = 1 since
h is injective. Hence d is the inverse of a.

Proposition 4. Let A be a 'K.-algebra admitting a finite basis. For all a 6 A,
Pc A/K (a; a) = 0.

This follows immediately from the Cayley-Hamilton theorem (§ 8, no. 1 1 ,
Proposition 20).

Proposition 5. Let A be a Yi-algebra and m a two-sided ideal of A. Suppose that
A = A/m is a free K.-module of finite dimension n, that there exists an integer r &gt; such
thatm r = {0} and that m'^/m* is a free A -module of finite dimension s t for 1 &lt; t ^ r.
Let s = s ± + - - • + s r and for allaeA let a denote the class of a mod. m. Then A is a
free YL-module of dimension ns and, for all aeA,

Tr A (a) = *.Tr Ao (&lt;z ), N A («) = (N Ao (« )) s
Pc A (a;X) = (Pc Ao (a ;X))*.

By virtue of II, § 1, no. 13, Proposition 25, m 1-1 ^ is a free K-module of
dimension ns t . Hence Proposition 1 of no. 2 can be applied with P 4 = m J ~ 1 /m &lt; ;

545



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

this shows in the first place that A is a free K-module of dimension

n(si H f- s r ) = ns. Moreover, the hypothesis implies that the A-module P t

is isomorphic to a direct sum of s t submodules isomorphic to the A-module A ;
by Proposition 1 of no. 2, therefore N P| («) = N Ao («) s &lt;; finally therefore

N A («) = N Ao (ay.

In this formula N Ao (a) is defined by considering A as a left A-module and it is
equal to the determinant of the K-linear mapping x^-ax of A into itself; but,
as ax = a Q x for xe A , N Ao (a) = N Ao (a ), which completes the proof of for-
mula (23) for the norm. The two others are shown analogously.

Proposition 6. Let Abe a commutative K.-algebra admitting a finite basis over K
and V an A-module admitting a finite basis over A. Then V admits a finite basis over K
and for every A-endomorphism uqfV,ifu K is the mapping u considered as a YL-endo-
morphism ofV,

Tr( % ) = Tr A/K (Tr( W )), det( % ) = N A/K (det( M ))
Pc(« K ; X) = N A[X]/KtX] (Pc( M ; X)).

Let («j)i&lt;i&lt;m be a basis of A over K and (fy)i&lt;/&lt; n a basis of V over A; then
(a,fy) is a basis of V over K (II, § 1, no. 13, Proposition 25). On the other hand
the third of formulae (24) can be deduced from the second applied to the endo-
morphism X - u of the A[X]-module A[X] ® A V (§ 8, no. 10). It will there-
fore suffice to show the first two formulae in (24). We shall first establish the
following lemma :

Lemma 1. Let X jy (1 ^ i ^ n, 1 ^ j ^ n) be n 2 indeterminates, X the square
matrix (X w ) of order n and D(X U) . . . , X nn ) e Z[X n , . . ., X nn ] the determinant
det(^T). On the other hand let Abe a commutative ring, M w (1 ^ i &lt; n, 1 ^ j ^ n)
n 2 matrices of order m over A, which are pairwise permutable, and M the square matrix
of order mn over A which can be expressed as a square matrix of matrices (II, § 10, no. 7)



M =



^11 ^12

M 21 M 22




&lt;M nl M n2 ... M n

Then the determinant ofM is equal to the determinant of the square matrix

D(M 11 ,...,M nn )
of order m.

We proceed by induction on n, the cases n = and n = 1 being trivial.
546



PROPERTIES OF NORMS AND TRACES IN AN ALGEBRA § 9.4

Let Z be a new indeterminate and N ti the matrix M xj + 8 w Z/ m (8 W the
Kronecker index). If D tf (X lls . . . , X nn ) is the cofactor of X w in the matrix X
(§8, no. 6), then

(25) X.D^Xn, . . . , X nn ) = S ifc D(X ll5 . . . , X nn )

(§ 8, no. 6, formula (28)). We write JV/, = D w (JVu, . . . , JV nn ), which is a square
matrix of order m over A[Z] and consider the product N. U, where



U =






NL



'In



N =



W„ N 12 ... JVi
No., iVoo ... JV 2



Performing fhis product in blocks (II, § 10, no. 5) and using formulae (25),
we obtain

fP N 12 ... N ln \

N 22 ... iV 2n

N.U= '



^0 N n2 ... N nn/
where we have written P = D(JV n , . . ., N nn ). Let

(N 22 . . . iV 2n ^



iJV. n ... JV,



tin/



which is a matrix of order m(n - 1) ; then (§ 8, no. 6, formula (31)) (det N)
(det U) = (det P) (det Q) and det U = det N^. But by the induction hypo-
thesis, det Q = det(D 11 (i\T 11 , . ..,N nn )) = det N{ ± and by virtue of the defi-
nition of the JV tf , clearly det Q is a polynomial in A[Z] of degree m(n — 1),
whose term in Z m(n_1) has coefficient 1 ; it follows immediately that det Q is not
a divisor of zero in the graded algebra A[Z]. We therefore conclude that
det N = det(D(i\T 11} . . ., JV BB )) in A[Z]; if we substitute for Z in these
polynomials, then det M = det(D(M lx , . . ., M nn )).

547



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Having shown this lemma, the K-module V is the direct sum of the K-

n

modules Ae 5 (1 ^ j &lt; n) ; we write u(e t ) = 2* c jk e k . For every element

xe } e Ae } , with x e A, the component of u(xej) in Ae k is xc Jk e k ; it follows that the
matrix of u k with respect to the basis (&lt;z 4 ^) of the K-module V can be expressed
in the form of a square matrix of matrices (M jk ), where M jk is the matrix of the
K-linear mapping xe } h&gt; xc jk e k of Ae 5 into Ae k with respect to the bases
( a i e j)i&lt;i&lt;m an d (&lt;¥k)i&lt;i&lt;m of these two K-modules (II, § 10, no. 5). If for all
teA,M(t) denotes the matrix, with respect to the basis (a^ &lt;i&lt;m of A over K,
of the endomorphism x ■-&gt; xt of A, then M jk = M(c jk ) ; as t i-&gt;- M (t) is a ring
homomorphism the matrices M jk are permutable with one another. Then

det u K = det(D(Afn,. . ., Af BB ))

by Lemma 1. But as * h-&gt; Af (*) is a ring homomorphism, D(M 11 ,. . ., M nn ) is
the matrix of the K-endomorphism x i-&gt; x.det(c ik ) of A with respect to basis
(a t ); by definition its determinant is therefore N A/K (det(«)), which proves the
second formula of (24). On the other hand,

n n / n \

Tr(« K ) = 2 Tr{M„) = 2 Tr AIK ( Cjj ) = Tr A/K ( 2^) = Tr A/K (Tr( M ))

and the proof of Proposition 6 is complete. 4

Corollary. Let Abe a commutative K.-algebra admitting a finite basis over K and B
an A-algebra admitting a finite basis over A. Then B admits a finite basis over K, and,
for all b e B ("transitivity formulae")

Tr B/K (A) = Tr A/K (Tr B/A (*)), N BIK (b) «= N A/K (N B/A (£))
(26)

Pc B/K (6;X) = N A[X]/K[X] (Pc B/A (6;X)).

This follows immediately from Proposition 6, setting V = B and u(x) = bx.

Remark. Suppose that the homomorphism X i-&gt; X . 1 of K into A is injective and
let K be identified with its image in A; suppose that A admits a finite basis
( e i)i&lt;i&lt;n as a K-module. Let s be an automorphism of A such that j(K) = K.
Let a be an element of A; then, by transporting the structure

(27) Tr A/K (*(a)) = s(Tr AIK (a))

(28) N A/K (.(«)) = s(N AIK (a)).

♦Consider also a derivation D of A (§ 10, no. 2) such that D(K) &lt;= K and

n

write D(*,) = 2^ e^ where \x j{ e K; write

n

ae t = 2* e^ with X yi e K.
548



DISCRIMINANT OF AN ALGEBRA § 9.5

Then

n

T&gt;(a)e t + aDfa) = D(«0 = 2 (D(*,)X„ + TO).
It follows that

n

with v„ = D(X„) + fc i (fx ifc X fcJ - X Jfc {A w ). As 2, ([A lk X ki - X lfc (x fcl ) = 0, there-

n

fore Tr A/K (D(a)) = 2, D(X il ), in other words

(29) Tr A/K (D(a)) = D(Tr A/K (a)).*

5. DISCRIMINANT OF AN ALGEBRA

Definition 3. Let A be a K.-algebra admitting a finite basis of n elements. The dis-
criminant of a sequence (x u . . ., x n ) of n elements of A, with respect to K, denoted by
D A/K (# l5 . . .,x n ), is the discriminant of the square matrix

(Tr A/K (#{#&gt;) )i&lt;i&lt;n,ls*i&lt;n'

Consider first a basis (^ 4 ) 1&lt;(&lt;n of A over K and write

n

(30) e&amp; = 2, x c m e k with c ijk e K.

n

Then Tr A/K (&lt;? 4 ) = 2^ c is „ whence Tr A/K (^ y ) = 2, fy fc c fcss and therefore

(31) -L^A/K^lJ • • •&gt; e n) = det^ £-/ s Cijk c kss)l&lt;i&lt;n,l&lt;jiZn)-

Now let (# ( ) i ^ j ^ n , (jiff ) i &lt; i &lt; n be two sequences of n elements of A and suppose
that there exists a square matrix of order n, M = (*%), with coefficients in K,

n

such that x t = 2, m^x] for 1 ^ i ^ n. We write

■* = (Tl*A/KWfy))l«;i&lt;n,l&lt;y&lt;n&gt; 2"' = ^ r AIS.{ x i x 'j))l&lt;i&lt;n,l&lt; i j^n'

Then Tr A/K (#i#y) = 2, m ip m jq Tr A/K (*X), whence T = M. T' .*M; the rule of
multiplication of determinants therefore gives

det T = det M .det T'.det *Af = (det M) 2 det 7"
whence finally

(32) D A/K (* 1} ...,x n ) = (det Af ) 2 D A/K (*;, ...,&lt;).

549



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

The above formula shows in particular that the discriminants of two bases of
A over K differ by the square of an invertible element of K and therefore generate
the same {principal) ideal of K. This ideal A A/K is called the discriminant ideal of
A over K; by formula (32) the discriminant of every sequence of n elements of
A which differ only in the order of the terms have the same discriminant, for
the determinant of a permutation matrix is equal to + 1.

Examples. (1) If A is a quadratic algebra of type (a, (3) over K, then (in the
notation of §2, no. 3) Trfo) = 2, Tr(* 2 ) = p,

Tr($ = aTrfo) + (3Tr(* 2 ) = 2a + (3 2 ,

whence D A/K (^ 1} e 2 ) = (3 2 + 4a.

(2) Let A = K[X]/K[X]P, where P(X) = X 3 + pK + g, so that if x is the
image of X in A, 1, x, x 2 form a basis of A over K and * 3 = — px — q. It is seen
immediately that Tr(l) = 3,Tr(*) = 0, Tr(* 2 ) = -2p, taking account of the
relation x 3 = —px — q, Tr(# 3 ) = — 3q and Tr(# 4 ) = 2p 2 , whence easily
D A/K (1,*,* 2 ) = -4/&gt; 3 -27? 2 .

(3) Let A be a quaternion algebra of type (a, (3, y) over K and (1, i,j, k) a
basis of A of type (a, (3, y); taking account of § 3, no. 5, formula (30), it is
easily found that Tr(l) = 4, Tr(t) = 20, Tr(j) = Tr(A:) = 0, then

Da/k(UJ&gt;*) = -16 Y 2 (P 2 + 4a) 2 .

(4) Let A = M n (K) and consider the canonical basis (E ii ) 1&lt;i&lt;ntl&lt;j&lt;n of A
over K (II, § 10, no. 3). It is immediate that Tr AIK (E tj ) = if j ^ i and
Tr A i K (E H ) = n for all i; it follows without difficulty that the matrix ^Tr{E i} E hk ) )
of order n 2 is of the form n.P, where P is a permutation matrix, whence
Da/k((^)) = ±n n \



§ 10. DERIVATIONS

In this paragraph, and unless otherwise mentioned, the algebras considered are not
assumed to be associative nor necessarily to possess a unit element; K denotes a commuta-
tive ring.

1. COMMUTATION FACTORS

When in this paragraph we speak of graduations without specifying them, we
shall always mean graduations of type A, where A is a commutative group written
additively. In this paragraph, a commutation factor over A with values in Z
is called a commutation factor over A (§ 4, no. 7, Definition 6). A commutation

550



GENERAL DEFINITION OF DERIVATIONS § 10.2

factor over A is therefore identified with a mapping e : (a, p) i-&gt; s aB = e(a, p) of
A x A into the multiplicative group { — 1, 1} such that for a, a', (3, p' in A,

r e (a + a', p) = s(a, (B)e(a', p)

(1) Je(a,p + p')=e(a,p) £ (a,p')

[e(P, a) = «(«,P).

It follows that s(2a, p) = s(a, 2p) = 1.

When A = Z, every commutation factor s is determined by giving e(l, 1) ;
there are therefore only two such factors, the first defined by

(2) z(p, q) = 1 for p,q inZ
and the second by

(3) z(p,q) = (-1)" for p,qmZ.

2. GENERAL DEFINITION OF DERIVATIONS

Consider a commutative ring K, six graded K-modules of type A: A, A', A",
B, B', B", and three K-linear mappings

[x:AxA'^A', X X :B x A'-^B", X 2 :AxB'-^B*

such that the corresponding K-linear mappings

A ® K A' -&gt; A", B ® K A' -&gt; B", A ® K B' -&gt; B*

are graded of degree 0. The image \x(a, a') for a e A, a' e A' is simply denoted by
a. a' or even aa', and similarly for the two other bilinear mappings. The degree
of a. a' is therefore the sum of the degrees of a and a'.

Definition 1. Given the above and a commutation factor e on A x A, an e-derivation
(or (K, e)-derivation) of degree 8 e A of (A, A', A") into (B, B', B") is a triple of
graded YiAinear mappings of degree 8:

&lt;/:A-&gt;B, d':A'-&gt;B', d": A*-»B"

such that, for every homogeneous element a e A anrf eo*ry element a' e A'

(4) d'(a . a') = («fe) . a' + s 6 , deg( a)a • (d'a') .

It obviously suffices by linearity to verify relation (4) when a and a' run
through respective generating systems of A and A'.

It is often convenient to denote the three mappings d, d', d" by the same
letter d (which can be justified by denoting equally by d the graded K-linear
mapping of degree 8

(a, a', a") »-&gt; (da, d'a', d"a n )

551



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

of A © A' © A" into B © B' © B"). Relation (4) can then be written more
simply

(5) d(a.a!) = {da), a' + s 6fdeg(a) a.(&lt;/a').

The s-derivations of (A, A', A") into (B, B', B") of given degree form a sub-
K-module of the K-module of graded linear mappings

Homgr K (A © A' © A", B © B' © B").

When e(a, (3) = 1 for all a, (3 in A, we say simply derivation (or K-derivatiori)
instead of s-derivation. Derivations form a sub-K-module of

Hom K (A © A' © A*, B © B' © B").

When A = Z and e(p. q) = ( — l) pq , every s-derivation of even degree is a
derivation; every e-derivation of odd degree is often called an antiderivation (or
IL-antiderivation) ; an antiderivation d therefore satisfies

(6) &amp;{a . a') = (da) . a' + ( - l) de *&lt; a &gt;&lt;z . (da')

for a homogeneous element aeA.

Remarks. (1) The notion of derivation can be defined for non-graded modules by
agreeing to give these modules the trivial graduation.

(2) If only e-derivations of given degree 8 are considered, the commutation
factor s may be disposed of as follows: the bilinear mapping X 2 : A x B' -&gt; B"
is modified by replacing it by the bilinear mapping X 2 : A x B' -&gt; B" such that,
for every homogeneous a in A and all b' e B',

~K 2 (a,b') = S 6 , deg(a)*2 («&gt;£')•

Then d is a derivation relative to the bilinear mappings (x, A l5 "k 2 .

The general definition of e-derivations given above is especially used in two
cases :

Case (I) : A = B, A' = B', A" = B" and the three bilinear mappings (x, X l9
X 2 are equal to the same mapping.

Case (II) : A = A' = A", B = B' = B", so that (for (*) A is a graded algebra
and the two K-bilinear mappings.

(7) X^BxA-^B, X 2 :AxB-&gt;B

are such that the corresponding K-linear mappings B (g) K A -&gt; B, A &lt;g) K B -&gt; B
are graded of degree 0. An s-derivation of degree S of A into B is then a graded
K-linear mapping d: A —&gt; B of degree B, such that for every homogeneous x in
A and every y e A, we have the relation

(8) d(xy) = (dx)y + e 6 .deg&lt;a)*(^)-
552



EXAMPLES OF DERIVATIONS § 10.3

Consider in particular in case (II) the case where A is a unital associative K-
algebra and X x and X 2 are the external laws of an (A, A)-bimodule (§ 4, no. 3,
Definition 3). This holds notably when A and B are two unital associative K-
algebras, a unital homomorphism of graded K-algebras p: A -&gt; B is given and
an (A, A)-bimodule structure is considered on B defined by the two external
laws

X x : [b, a) ^ bp(a), X 2 : (a, b) h-&gt; p{a)b

for a e A, b e B.

Cases (I) and (II) have the following case in common: consider a graded K-
algebra A, take B = A, mappings (7) both being multiplication on A. We
then speak of an z-derivation (or (K, s) -derivation) of the graded algebra A: it is a
graded K-linear mapping of A into itself, of degree 8, satisfying (8) for every
homogeneous * in A and ally e A. In particular if A is a graded ring, considered
as an (associative) Z-algebra, we speak of the z-derivation of the ring A.

Let A be a unital commutative associative K-algebra and B an A-module; when we
speak of a derivation of A into B, it will always be understood that we mean with
the A-bimodule structure on B derived from its A-module structure; then the
formula

(9) d(xy) = x(dy) + y(dx) for xeA,yeA

holds for such a derivation d: A -»■ B.

3. EXAMPLES OF DERIVATIONS

Example 1 . *Let A be an R-algebra of differentiable mappings of R into R and
let x be a point of R; R can be considered as an A-module with the external
law {f a) *-+f(x Q )a. Then the mapping /■-► D/*(x ) is a derivation, since
[Functions of a Real Variable, I, § 1, no. 3)

(D(/£))(*o) = (D/(*o))*(*o) +/(*o)(D*(*o)).«

Example 2. *Let X be a differentiable manifold of class C 00 and let A be the
graded R-algebra of differential forms on X. The mapping which associates
with every differential form wonX its exterior differential da is an anti-
derivation of degree + 1 (Differentiable and Analytic Manifolds, R, § 8). #

Example 3. Let A be an associative K-algebra. For all aeA, the mapping
x^(W — xa is a derivation of the algebra A (cf. no. 6).

Example 4. Let M be a K-module and A the exterior algebra A(M*) with
its usual graduation (§ 7, no. 1). *It will be seen in § 11, no. 9 that, for all
x £ M, the right interior product i(x) is an antiderivation of A of degree — 1.„,

553



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Example 5. Returning to the general situation of Definition 1 of no. 2, let
K be another commutative ring and p:K— &gt;K a ring homomorphism; let
A, A', A", B, B', B* denote the graded K-modules obtained respectively from
A, A', A", B, B', B" by extending the ring of scalars to K (II, § 1 1, no. 5) ; we
derive from jx, X x and X 2 K-bilinear mappings

{*:£ x A'-»A~", AitB x A'-&gt;B", X 2 :AxB'-&gt;IT

by considering the tensor products by If of the corresponding K-linear
mappings to fz, X x and X 2 (II, § 5, no. 1). Then, if d\s an e-derivation of degree
8 of (A, A', A") into (B, B', B"), the mapping d = d ® l£ of A © A' © A" into
B © B' © B" is an e-derivation of degree 8 of (A, A', A") into (B, B', B").

Example 6. Let A be a graded K-algebra of type Z ; a graded linear K-mapping
of degree 0, d: A -&gt; A, is denned by taking, for x n s A„(n € Z), d(x n ) = nx n .
This mapping is a derivation of A, since, for x p e A p , x q e A q ,

d(x p x q ) = {p + g)x p x q = d(x p )x q + x p d{x q ).

4. COMPOSITION OF DERIVATIONS

We suppose in this no. that case (I) of no. 2 holds, that is that A, A', A"
are three graded K-modules of type A and that we are given a K-bilinear
mapping (x : A x A' -&gt; A" corresponding to a graded K-linear mapping of
degree 0, A ® K A' -&gt;- A". The graded endomorphisms/of A © A' © A" such
that /(A) &lt;=■ A, /(A') &lt;= A' and /(A") &lt;= A" form a graded subalgebra of the
graded associative algebra Endgr K (A © A' © A") (§ 3, no. 1, Example 2).
In particular two s-derivations of (A, A', A") can be composed, but it should
not be thought that the composition of two s-derivations is an s-derivation.

On every graded algebra B of type A is defined the e-bracket (or simply
bracket when s = 1) of two homogeneous elements w, v, by the formula (10)

[«, v] e = uv - s d eg«,deg^« (denoted simply by [u, v\ if e = 1).

By extending this mapping by linearity, a K-bilinear mapping (u, v) y-&gt; [u, v] e
of B x B into B is obtained. Then, for homogeneous u and v in B

[v, tt] 6 = —s iegUfdegv [u,v] &amp; .

Applying this definition to the graded algebra Endgr K (A © A' ©A"), the
e-bracket of two graded endomorphisms is thus defined.

Proposition 1. Let d lt d 2 be two e-derivations of (A, A', A") of respective degrees
S 1} S 2 . Then the e-bracket

{di, d 2 ] s = d x od 2 - e 6l&gt;52 rf 2 o d x

is an e-derivation of degree S x + S 2 . Moreover, ifd is an e-derivation of (A, A', A") of
degree $ and ife 6t6 = — 1, then d 2 = dodis a derivation.

554



COMPOSITION OF DERIVATIONS § 10.4

Suppose x e A is homogeneous of degree £; for all y e A',
(11) d x {d 2 (xy)) = ({d x d 2 )(x))y + S6t.&lt;&gt;2+!.( d 2 x )( d iy)

taking account of formulae (1) of no. 1. Exchanging the roles of d x and d 2 , we
obtain, after simplifications again using (1) (no. 1),

(d x d 2 )(xy) - H ltb2 {d 2 d x ){xy) = {{d x d 2 ){x))y - e 6lf62 ((d 2 d x )(x))y

+ «oi+«2.**((«Wi)(y))

- e 6 1 ,6 2 e6 1+ 6 2 .^((Vl)(y))

that is, writing d = [d Xi d 2 ] e and 8=8! + 8 2 ,

d(xy) = (dx)y + e 6f ^x(dy)

which proves that d is an e-derivation.

On the other hand, if, in (11), we let d x = d 2 = d, 8j = 8 2 = 8 and
e 6&gt;6 = —1, we obtain, since then s 6)6+5 = — s 6&gt;5 by (1),

d 2 {xy) = (d 2 x)y + e 26tl x(d 2 y)

and as s 26&gt; 5 = 1 it is seen that d 2 is a derivation.

Corollary. Suppose that A = Z. Then :

(i) The square of an antiderivation is a derivation.

(ii) The bracket of two derivations is a derivation.

(iii) The bracket of an antiderivation and a derivation of even degree is an anti-
derivation.

(iv) If d x and d 2 are antiderivations, d x d 2 + d 2 d x is a derivation.

Under the hypotheses of the beginning of this no., consider now a finite
sequence D = (d i ) 1&lt;i ^ n of pairwise permutable derivations of (A, A', A"). For
every polynomial P(X l5 . . ., X n ) in the algebra KpC l9 . . ., XJ, the element
P(rf 1} . . . , d n ) of Endgr K (A © A' ® A") is then defined (§ 2, no. 9) ; its abbrevia-
ted notation is P(D).

Proposition 2. With the above hypotheses and notation, consider In indeterminates
Ti, . . . , T n , Ti, . . . , T» and for every polynomial F e KrXj, . . . , X B ] write
F(T) = F(T 1} . . ., T n ), F(T') = F(Ti, . . ., T;) and

F(T + T) = F(T X + Ti, . . ., T n + T;).
Suppose that

P(T + T') = 2 QiTOR, (!")
where the Q { and R, belong to K[X l5 . . . , X n ], Then, for all x e A andy e A',
(12) P(D)te) = 2 (Q. i (T&gt;)x)(R i (D)y).

555



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

We introduce n other indeterminates TJ, . . . , T£ and consider the poly-
nomial algebra Kp^, . . . , T n , Ti, . . . , T;, TJ, . . . , T£] = B; on the other
hand we consider the K-module M of bilinear mappings of A x A' into
A"; a B-module structure is defined on M by writing, for every K-bilinear
mapping/ e M and 1 ^ i ^ n,

( ( T if) ( a &gt; a l =f(dia,a')

(13) i (T;/)(m') = /K40
{{Xf){a,a')=d i {f(a,a')).

Since the d i are permutable with one another, it is seen that, for every poly-
nomial F e K[X l5 . . ., X n ], (F(T)/)(a, a') = f(F(D)a, a'),

(F(T)/)(a,a')«/(a,F(D)a')

and (F(T*)/) = F(D)(f(a,a')). Hence, to prove (12) it suffices to show
that

(14) (P(T*) - 2 a(T)R ( (T')) . [x =

or also (P(T") - P(T + T')).[x = in the B-module M. Now, the hypo-
thesis that the d { are derivations can also be expressed by saying that, for
1 ^ i ' ^ n,

(15) (T{'-T i -T' i ). ( x =

in the B-module M. By considering successively the polynomials

pen, ia, -j;)- p(Tx + Ti, ts, . . . , t:)

P(T X + Ti, TS, • • • , TJ) - P(T X + Ti, T 2 + T' 2 , . . . , TJ)

p(Ti + Ti, . . ., T n _ x + t;_ 1} t@ - pci\ + Ti, . . ., T n _ x + t;_ 13 T n + t;)

it is seen that the difference P(T") - P(T + T') can be written in the form



2 (Tf - T 4 - TOG^T, T", T")



where the G 4 are elements of B. Relation (14) is therefore an immediate con-
sequence of relations (15).

Corollary (Leibniz's formula). Let rf { (1 ^ i ^ n) be n derivations of
(A, A', A") which are permutable with one another. For all a = (a l5 . . . , a n ) e N n ,
we write

(16) d« = d?d% 2 . . . dl n .

556



' DERIVATIONS OF AN ALGEBRA A INTO AN A-MODULE § 10.5

Then, for xeA andy e A',

(17) d«{xy) = p+ 2 a ((p, y))* W(y)

where we have written (in the notation introduced at the beginning of the chapter)

(18) ((P,y)) = (P+y)!/(P!yO.

This follows immediately from the multinomial formula (I, § 8, no. 2)

(T + T)«= b+ 2 b ((P,y))T b T' t
and Proposition 2.

5. DERIVATIONS OF AN ALGEBRA A INTO AN A-MODULE

We suppose in this no. that Case (II) of no. 2 holds. Then there is a graded K-
algebra A and a graded K-module E and also two K-linear mappings of
degree

E K A -&gt; E, A &lt;g&gt; K E -&gt; E

denoted by

*®fli-&gt;*.fl and a®x&gt;-&gt;a.x for a e A and x e E.

Proposition3. Z^ d:A-&gt;E be an z-derivation of degree 8. Then Ker(d) is a
graded subalgebra of A; if A admits a unit element, it belongs to Ker(rf).

Clearly Ker(J) is a graded sub-K-module of A; further, relation (8) of
no. 2 shows that, if x and y are two homogeneous elements belonging to
Ker(rf), then d(xy) = and hence #yeKer(rf). Finally, if A admits a unit
element 1 (of degree 0, cf. § 3, no. 1), relation (8) of no. 2, where x andy are
replaced by 1, gives d(l) = d(l) + d(\) and hence d (1) = 0.

Corollary. Let d x and d 2 be two z-derivations from A to E of the same degree 8.
If d x and d 2 take the same values at each element of a generating system of the algebra
A, then d x = d 2 .

d\ — d 2 is an e-derivation of degree 8, hence Ker^ — d 2 ) is a subalgebra
of A which contains a generating system of A and hence is equal to A.

Proposition 4. Let &lt;/:A-»-E be an z-derivation of degree 8. Suppose that A has
a unit element 1 and let x be a homogeneous element of A with an inverse # -1 in A.
Then

(19) dix- 1 ) = -e 6 , iee(x) x- 1 {{dx)x~ 1 ) = -e^goaC*- 1 ^))*- 1 .

557



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

We have d(xx~ x ) = d{\) — (Proposition 3), whence

(dx)x~ x + eo.detf*)*^*- 1 )) =

which proves the first formula of (19). On the other hand, a; -1 is homogeneous
of degree -deg(*) and e 6 ,detr(*) = e 6 , -deg(*) by formulae (1) of no. 1; writing
d(x~ 1 x) = 0, the second formula of (19) is obtained similarly.

Proposition 5. Suppose that A is an integral domain and let L be its field of frac-
tions. Every derivation of A into a vector space E over L (considered as an A-module)
can be extended uniquely to a derivation ofh into E.

Let d be a derivation of A into E and d a derivation of L into E extending
d; then, for u e A, v e A, v # 0, of necessity, by virtue of (19),

(20) d(ufv) = v~ x du - uv'Hv

which proves the uniqueness of d. Conversely, we show that d can be defined
by formula (20) ; it must first be verified that if ujv = u'jv' the value of the
right hand side of (20) does not change when u is replaced by «' and v by v'.
Now, uv' = vu', hence v'(du) + u(dv') — v(du') + u'(dv) and therefore
v'idu — uv~ x dv) = v(du' — u'v'~ 1 dv'), since uv'v~ x = u' and u'v'~ x v = u.
Thus a mapping rf:L -» E has been defined which extends d; it is immediately
verified that it is K-linear and a derivation.

Proposition 6. Suppose that A is a unital associative graded J^-algebra and E a
graded (A, A)-bimodule. If d:A-&gt;E is an z-derivation of degree S, then, for every
finite sequence {x^) 1&lt;i&lt;n of homogeneous elements of A, of respective degrees £ t
(1 *$ i &lt; n),

n

(21) d(x x X 2 ...X n ) = 2^ 66,^ + ... + *,_!*! • • • *l-l(&lt;k()*i+l • • • *n-

Formula (21) is trivial for n = and is proved by induction on n, taking
account of (4) (no. 2).

Corollary. Suppose that A is a unital commutative associative algebra and E an
A-module. Ifd:A-&gt;Eisa derivation, then, for every integer n ^ 0,

(22) d (x n ) =nx n ~ x (dx) for all xeA.

It suffices to give A the trivial graduation and apply (21) with all the x t
equal to x.

We return to the general case of an e-derivation d:A-+E of degree S.
Let Z e be the set of a e A such that for every homogeneous component a a of
a of degree a, for every homogeneous x in E,

(23) Xa a = S a , flegf(^) a a x '

558



DERIVATIONS OF AN ALGEBRA § 10.6

If A is a unital associative graded algebra and E a graded (A, A)-bimodule
it follows immediately from this definition that Z 6 is a graded subalgebra of A
containing the unit element.

Proposition 7. Suppose that A is a unital associative graded algebra and E a graded
(A, A)-bimodule. Let d:A -&gt; E be an e-derivation of degree 8 and a a homogeneous
element ofZ B of degree a. Then the mapping x i-&gt; a(dx) is an e-derivation of degree 8 + a.

We write d'(x) = a{dx) ; for x homogeneous of degree 5 in A and y e A,
by virtue of (23) and (1) (no. 1),

d'(xy) = a{(dx)y) + e 6fl a(x{dy)) = (a{dx))y + e 6+ «, x (xa)(dy)
= {d'x)y + e 6+a ^x{d'y).

Proposition 7 says that the K-module of s-derivations of A into E is a graded
Z e -module of type A.

6. DERIVATIONS OF AN ALGEBRA

Let A be a graded K-algebra; for every homogeneous element a e A, let ad 8 (a),
or simply ad (a) if no confusion can arise, denote the K-linear mapping of A
into A

x h-&gt; [a, #] e

(no. 4, formula (10)) which is graded of degree deg a.

Proposition 8. Let Abe a graded ¥L-algebra.

(i) For every e-derivation d:A-&gt;A and every homogeneous element a of A,

(24) [i,ad,(fl)],=.ad t (&lt;fa).

(ii) If the algebra A is associative, ad £ (a) is an e-derivation of A of degree deg (a).

(i) Suppose that d is of degree S, let a = deg a and write/ = [rf, ad 8 (a)] e .
For every homogeneous element x e A of degree !*, we have, by (1) (no. 1),

f(x) = d(ax - e(oc, fyxa) — e 6tK (a(dx) — e a#6+t (&lt;&amp;)a)
= (da)x + e 6&gt;tt a(dx) — £«,,.(&lt;&amp;) a — e 6+(X ^x(da)

- e 6&gt;(l a(dx) + s a&gt;5 (^)fl
= (da)x - e 6+Utl x(da) = [da,x] z .

(ii) For all x homogeneous of degree £ and all y homogeneous of degree
i) in A,

ad 6 (a)(*y) = a(xy) - e a&gt;l+r ,(xy)a

= (ax - e Utl xa)y + e a ^x(ay — e Utr) ya)
= ad s (a)(x).y + e a&gt; ^.ad 6 (a)(y)

taking account of (1) and the associativity of A.

559



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

When A is associative, ad 6 (fl) is called the inner e-derivation of A defined
by a.

Corollary. Let A be an associative graded algebra. For two homogeneous elements,
a, b of A,

(25) [ad e (a),ad e (*)] e = ad 8 ([M] e ).

It suffices to replace d by ad e (a) and ad e (a) by ad E (£) in (24).

If deg a = a, deg b = (3, formula (25) is equivalent to the following rela-
tion for every homogeneous element ceAof degree y

(26) e a&gt;Y [a, [b, c] s ] 8 + e^ a [b, [c, a] e ] e + e Y&gt; &amp; [c, [a, b] s ] z =
called the Jacobi identity.

7. FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES

In this no., all algebras are assumed to be associative and unital and every algebra homo-
morphism is assumed to be unital.

Proposition 9. Let A, B be two graded YL-algebras, E an (A, A)-bimodule and F
a graded (B,B)-bimodule; let p:A-»B be a graded algebra homomorphism and
0:E— &gt;F a graded A-homomorphism of A-bimodules (relative to p), of degree 0.
Then:

(i) For every e-derivation d':B-&gt;F, cf'op:A-»p*(F) is an e-derivation of the
same degree.

(ii) For every e-derivation d:A -&gt;■ E, o d:A -&gt; p*(F) is an e-derivation of the
the same degree.

The two assertions follow immediately from the relations

d'( 9 (xy)) = rf'(p(*)p(y)) = d'( P (x))p(y) + e 6 , AP (x)d'( P (y))
Q{d{xy)) = Q((dx)y + e 6 ^x(dy)) = 6(^)p(y) + e 6tX p(x)Q(dy)

for x e A homogeneous of degree £ and y e A, S and 8' denoting the respective
degrees of d and d'.

Corollary. LetS be a generating system of the algebra A. In order that d' o p = o d,
it is necessary and sufficient that d'( P (x)) — Q(d(x))for all xeS.

This is an immediate consequence of Proposition 9 and no. 5, Corollary to
Proposition 3.

Under the conditions of Proposition 9, we know that B has (by means of p)
an (A, A)-bimodule structure (II, § 1, no. 14, Example 1).

Proposition 10. Under the conditions of Proposition 9, for an e-derivation d' :B -*- F
to be A-linear for the left (resp. right) A-module structures on B and p*(F), it is
necessary and sufficient that d' be zero on the subalgebra p(A) ofB.

560



FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES § 10.7

We perform the proof for left A-module structures. For a e A, b e B,

d'(p(a)b) = d'{?{a))b + p(a)d'b

and hence if d' o p = 0, d' is linear for the left A-module structures on B and
p*(F). Conversely, if this is so, in particular

d'( 9 (a))=d'( 9 (a)A) = p(aK(l)=0

(no. 5, Proposition 3).

In particular let D K (B, F) denote the K-module of derivations of B into F
(no. 2); those among these derivations which are A-linear, in other words
those which are zero on p(A), form a sub-K-module of D K (B, F), denoted
by D A , P (B, F) or simply D A (B, F) (obviously D K (B, F) = D Ki(1) (B, F), where
&lt;j&gt;:K -* B is the homomorphism defining the K-algebra structure on B).

Now let A, B, G be three graded K-algebras, p : A -&gt; B, a : B -&gt;■ G two graded
algebra homomorphisms and G a graded (C, C)-bimodule; if D A (B, G),
D B (C, G) and D A (C, G) denote the respective K-modules D A P (B, ct*(G)),
D B ,a(C, G) and D A , 0oP (C, G), D B (C, G) is clearly a sub-K-module of D A (C, G)
since ff(p(A)) c &lt;j(B).

Proposition 11. Under the above conditions, there is an exact sequence ofKrhomo-
morphisms

(27) -&gt; D B (C, G) -U D A (G, G) -1&gt; D A (B, G)

where u is the canonical injection and v the homomorphism d&gt;-&gt; d o a (Proposition 9) .
The kernel of v is the set of derivations d:C -&gt; G such that d(a(b)) =
for all b e B, which is precisely the image of u.

8. RELATIONS BETWEEN DERIVATIONS AND ALGEBRA HOMOMOR-
PHISMS

We suppose again in this no. that Case (II) of no. 2 holds and the graded K-
algebra A is not assumed to be associative. Given an element SeA, consider
the graded K-module E(S) (II, § 11, no. 2) such that

(E(»))„ = E, +0

for all n e A. We define on the graded K-module A © E(S) a graded K-algebra
structure by setting, for every homogeneous element aeA and arbitrary
elements a' e A, x, x' in E(8)

(28) {a, x) (a', x') = {aa', x . a! + e 6j deg(a) a . *') ;

the verification of the fact that this multiplication defines a graded ring struc-
ture is immediate.

561



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

The projection/*: (a, x) ■-»■ a is called the augmentation of the algebra A © E(8)
and is a graded algebra homomorphism. The graded K-linear mappings
g\A -&gt; A © E(8) of degree such that the composition

A-£*A©E(8)-^A

is the identity 1 A are the mappings of the form x \-&gt; (#,/(#)), where/: A -&gt;■ E
is a graded K-linear mapping of degree 8.

Proposition 12. For a graded YL-linear mapping f: A -&gt;E of degree 8 to fo a»
e-derivation, it is necessary and sufficient that the mapping x*-&gt; (x,f(x)) of A into
A © E(8) be a graded K.-algebra homomorphism.

Using the fact that for x homogeneous in A and y e A

{xy,f{xy)) = (x,f(x)).{y,f(y)),

we obtain, taking account of (28), the equivalent relation

f( x y) =f( x )-y + ^,aeg( X )Xf(y),

whence the proposition.

Proposition 13. For the algebra A © E(8) to be associative and unital, it is neces-
sary and sufficient that A be associative and unital, and that the mappings (a,x) i-*-a.x
and (a,x)t-+x.a define on E an (A, A)-bimodule structure; the unit element of
A©E(8) is then {1,0).

If an element (u, m) e A © E(8) is written as unit element of this algebra,
it is immediately found that u must be the unit element of A; writing
(m, ot).(0, x) — (0,x).(u,m) = (0,x), we obtain u.x = x.u = x for *eE
and, writing (u, m) . (u, 0) = (u, 0) . (u, m) — (u, 0), we obtain m = 0. The
fact that A is associative when A © E(8) is follows from the fact that the aug-
mentation is a surjective homomorphism. The condition (x.a').a" = x. (a' . a")
is then equivalent to ((0, x){a\ 0)){a\ 0) = (0, x){{a\ 0)\a", 0)) and similarly
the condition a.(a'.x) = (a. a') .x is equivalent to

(a, 0) ((a', 0) (0, *)) = ((a, 0) (a', 0)) (0, *) ;

finally the condition a. (x.a') = (a.x).a' is equivalent to

(a, 0)((0, *)(«', 0)) = ((a,0)(0, *))(«', 0).

9. EXTENSION OF DERIVATIONS

Proposition 14. Let A be a commutative ring, M an A-module, B the A-algebra
T(M) (resp. S(M), resp. A(M)) and E a (B, B) -bimodule. Let d Q :A-&gt;E be a

562



EXTENSION OF DERIVATIONS § 10.9

derivation of the ring A into the A-module E and rfjiM—^E an additive group
homomorphism such that, for all aeA and all xe M,

(29) d x (ax) = ad x (x) + d (a).x,
and further, when B = S(M),

(30) x.d x (y) + d x {x) .y = y.d x {x) + d x (y) .x

for all x, y in M, and, when B = A(M),

(31) x.d x (x) + d x (x).x =

for all x g M. Then there exists one and only one derivation dofB (considered as
a TL-algebra) into the (B, B)-bimodule E such that d \ A = d and d | M = d x .

We take on the Z-module B E the associative Z-algebra structure defined
by

{b,t)(b',t') = {bb',bt' + tb')

which has (1, 0) as unit element (no. 8, Proposition 13). Under the canonical
injection t h&gt; (0, t), E is identified with a two-sided ideal of B © E such that
E 2 = {0}. On the other hand, the mapping h : B E defined by h Q (a) =
(a, d (a)) is a unital ring homomorphism (no. 8, Proposition 12); under this
mapping, B E then becomes an A-algebra. Moreover, if, for all x e M,
we write h x (x) = (x, d 1 (x)), it follows from the definition of h and (29) that
h x (ax) = h (a)h 1 (x) ; in other words h ± is an A-linear mapping of M into B E.
Then there exists one and only one A-algebra homomorphism, h:B-&gt;B©E
such that h \ M = h x (and necessarily h \ A = h Q ) : for, if B = T(M), this
follows from § 5, no. 1, Proposition 1 ; if B = S(M), condition (30) shows that
h(x)h(y) = h(y)h(x) for all x, y in M and the conclusion follows from § 6, no. 1,
Proposition 2; finally if B = A(M), condition (31) shows that (h(x)) 2 =
for all xeM, since x A x — and the conclusion follows from §7, no. 1,
Proposition 1. The homomorphism h is such that the composition/* o h: B -&gt; B
with the augmentation p: B E -* B is the identity 1 B , forp o h and 1 B co-
incide by definition for the elements of A and those of M and the set of these
elements is a generating system of B. We can therefore write h(b) = (b, d(b))
for all b e B and the mapping b \-&gt; d(b) of B into E is a derivation with the
required properties, by virtue of Proposition 12 of no. 8.

Corollary. Let M be a graded K-module of type A; the K-algebras T(M), S(M)
and A(M) are given the corresponding graduations of type A' = A x Z (§ 5, no. 5,
Proposition 7, § 6, no. 6, Proposition 10 and § 7, no. 7, Proposition 11). On the
other hand M is given the graduation of type A' such that M a&gt; x = M a for all a e A
and M a§ n = {0}for aeA and n # 1. Let e' be a commutation factor over A'.

563



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(i) LetR be a graded {left and right) T(M) -bimodule of type IS! ; for all 8eA
and every integer neZ, every graded K-linear mapping f: M -^ E of degree 8/ = (8, ra)
can be extended uniquely to an s' '-derivation d:T(M) -&gt; E of degree 8'.

(ii) Let E be a graded S{M)-module of type A' ; for a graded K-linear mapping
/:M-&gt;E of degree 8' to be extendable to an e' -derivation d:S{M) -&gt;E of degree
8', it is necessary and sufficient that, for every ordered pair (x, y) of homogeneous ele-
ments ofM,

(33) x.f{y) + ey f(iegiy)tl) y.f(x) = y.f{x) + &amp;A&lt;i* e w,i)X.f(y).
The e' '-derivation d is then unique.

(iii) Let E be a graded {left and right) A{M)-bimodule of type A'; for a graded
K-linear mapping f:M-&gt; E of degree 8' to be extendable to an s' '-derivation

d:A{M)-*E
of degree 8', it is necessary and sufficient that, for every homogeneous element x of ISA,

(34) *./(*) + e^ (deBOe)&gt;1) /(*) .x = 0.
The z' -derivation d is then unique.

Remark 2 of no. 2 is applied with one of the external B-module laws on E
(with B equal to T(M), S(M) or A(M)) modified; the external law thus
modified is still, by (1) (no. 1), a B-module law and the B-module law thus
obtained on E is still compatible with the other B-module structure. It then
suffices to apply Proposition 14 with A = K and d = 0.

Example (1). In the application of Proposition 14 note that if d = condition

(29) means simply that d x is K-linear. If we take in particular E = B and the
(B, B) -bimodule structure derived from the ring structure on B, conditions

(30) and (31) are automatically satisfied when d x is taken to be the composi-
tion of an endomorphism s of M and the canonical injection M-&gt;B; this is
obvious for (30) since S(M) is commutative and for (31) this follows from the
fact that x and s{x) are of degree 1 in A(M). It is therefore seen that every
endomorphism sofM. can be extended uniquely to a derivation D s of T(M) (resp.

S(M), resp. A(M)), which is of degree 0. Moreover, for two endomorphisms
s, t of M,



(35) [D s ,D t ]=D,



Ls.tl



for both sides are derivations of T(M) (resp. S(M), resp. A(M)) which are
equal to [s, t] on M.

564



EXTENSION OF DERIVATIONS



§10.9



The expression for D s is obtained using formula (21) of no. 5, which gives
respectively, for x Xi x 2i . . . , x n in M,



(36)



' ®*n)
n

= 2* X x



D«(*i ® x 2 ®

n

• • ® Xj-j (8) j(AT,) &lt;g)# i + i
n
L\(#i#2 • • • x n) = /-&gt; x l • • • ^i-l^W^i + l • • • x n



®*n



D s (#! A x 2 A



• A *»)

n

= 2



x x A • • • A ^i_i A .f(x t ) A # i + 1 A • • • A x n .



D s



In the case of the algebra A(M), there is the following interpretation of



Proposition 15. If M is a free K-module of finite rank n, then, for every endo-
morphism s of"M., the restriction to A*(M) of the derivation D s is the homothety of
ratio Tv(s).

Let (fy)i&lt;y&lt; n t&gt; e a basis of M and write e = e x A e 2 A • • • A e n . If



n



■jk e k&gt;



the third formula in (36) gives

n

D,(«) = 2, e x A • • • A «i_i A j(«,) A e l + 1 A



A e n = (y^a^



Example (2). In the Corollary to Proposition 14, part (iii), let A = {0}, the
graduation on A(M) then being the usual graduation of type Z; on the other
hand take s(p, q) = ( — l) pq . Then, for every linear form x* eM* on M,
x i-»- (x, x*y is a graded K-linear mapping of degree — 1 of M into A (M)
satisfying relation (34); then there exists an antiderivation i(x*) of A(M), of
degree — 1, such that (by virtue of formula (21) of no. 5)
« (**)(*! A • • • A*„)



Z (-1) 1 \x i ,x*}x 1 A • • • A Xi_ x A x i + 1 A •



A x n



and which is a special case of the inner product to be defined in § 11, no. 9,
formula (68).

Proposition 16. Let A be a commutative ~K-algebra, M t (1 &lt; t &lt; n) and P A-
modules and H the A-module of A-multilinear mappings o/Mx x M 2 x • • • x M n



565



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

into P. Suppose that there is given a 'K.-derivation d :A^&gt;Aofthe algebra A, for each i,
a K-linear mapping d t : M t -&gt; M { and a K-linear mapping D : P -&gt; P, so that, for
1 ^ i &lt; n, (d , d t , d t ) is a K-derivation of (A, M i5 M 4 ) into itself and (d , D, D)
is a 'K.-derivation of (A, P, P) into itself. Then there exists a K-linear mapping
D' :H — &gt; H such that (d , D', D') is a K-derivation of (A, H, H) into itself and

(37) DC/fo,...,^)

n
== (^y)(*U • • •&gt; *n) + fe x f\ x \&gt; • • •) x t-l&gt; &lt;*i x U x i + l&gt; ' • •&gt; x n)

for all x t g M(/or 1 &lt; i &lt; n andfe H.

We show that for/e H, the mapping D/of M x x M 2 x • • • x M„ into P
defined by (37) is A-multilinear. For a £ A,

(P'f)(ax lt x 2 , ...,*») = *D{af{x x , ..., *„)) -f(di( ax i)&gt; x 2, • • •, * n )

n

and by hypothesis

D(a/(*i, ...,*„)) = (d a)f(x 1 , ...,*„) + «D(/(*i, . . ., *„))
and ^(axi) = (i a )*i + a.d x x lt which gives

(D/Xa*!, *„,...,*„) =a.(Dy)(^,...,^ n )
and linearity in each of the x t is proved similarly. On the other hand,
(D'(af))(x 1} ...,*„) = D(af( Xl , ...,*.))

n
~ 1 = 1 tf^-* 1 * ' ' ' ' *' ~ x&gt; ***' X t + 1*' ' '» x nJ

= {d a)f{x 1 , ..., x n )) + flD(/(*i, ...,*„))

n
~ 1=1 W^* 1 ' • ' '&gt; X i-1&gt; ^iXi, X i + 1 , . . ., X n )

= (d Q a)f{x 1} ...,*„) + a{T&gt;'f) (* 1} ...,*.)
in other words

T&gt;'(af) = {d a)f+a(Bf)

which establishes the proposition.

Examples. (3) Applying Proposition 16 to the case n = 1, M t = M, P = A,
then H = M*, the dual of M, and it is seen that for a K-derivation (d , d, d)
of (A, M, M) is derived a K-derivation (d , d*, d*) of (A, M*, M*) such that

(38) d (m, m*&gt; = (dm, m*&gt; + &lt;m,d*m*y

for m e M and m* e M*. The K-linear mapping of M © M* into itself

566



PROBLEM FOR DERIVATIONS: NON-COMMUTATVE CASE § 10.10

which is equal to d on M and to d* on M* then satisfies condition (29) and
there is therefore a K-derivation D of the A-algebra T(M ©M*), which re-
duces to d on A, to d on M and to d* on M*. The restriction dj of D to the
sub-A-module T$(M) of T(M © M*) (§ 5, no. 6) is a K-endomorphism of
T5(M) such that (d Q , rfj, &lt;§) is a K-derivation of (A, T$(M), T$(M)). Moreover,
for i e I, j e J, if we write V = I - {i}, J' = J - {jh it: * immediately verified
that for the contraction c\ (§ 5, no. 6)

4(rfj(z)) = d}'(c)(z)) for all z e T^M).

(4) Let M| (1 ^ i &lt; 3) be three A-modules and, for each i, suppose that
(d , d i} dj is a derivation of (A, M f , M t ) ; applying Proposition 16 again for
n = 1, a derivation (d , d tj , d u ) of (A, H w , H„), where H w = Hom A (M j , M y ),
is derived for each ordered pair (i,j) . With this notation, for u e Hom A (M 1 , M 2 )
and v e Hom A (M 2 , M 3 ),

(39) d 13 {v o u) = (&lt;/ 23 ») °u + vo (d 12 u)
as is immediately verified from the definitions.

10. UNIVERSAL PROBLEM FOR DERIVATIONS ; NON-COMMUTATIVE CASE

Throughout the rest of § 10 all the algebras are assumed to be associative and unital
and all the algebra homomorphisms are assumed to be unital.

Let A be a K-algebra; the tensor product A ® K A has canonically an
(A, A)-bimodule structure under which

(40) x. (u ® v) .y = (xu) {vy)

for all x, y, u, v in A (§4, no. 3, Example 2). The K-linear mapping
m:A &lt;g) K A-&gt;A corresponding to multiplication in A (and hence such that
m(x ® y) = xy) is an (A, A)-bimodule homomorphism; its kernel I is therefore
a sub-bimodule of A ® K A.

Lemma 1. The mapping 8 A :x&gt;-+x &lt;g&gt; 1 — 1 x is a K-derivation of A into I anrf
I is generated, as a left A-module, by the image of S A .

The first assertion follows from the fact that

(xy) ® 1 - 1 &lt;g) (xy) = (* 1 -1 ®x).y + x.(y ®l - 1 0y)

by (40). On the other hand, if the element 2, x { y { (for x„ y t in A) belongs

to I, by definition Z, #,y t = and hence

2 (*« 0y f ) =2 x,(l 0y ( - y, 1)
by (40), which completes the proof of the lemma.

567



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Proposition 17. The derivation 8 A has the following universal property: for every
(A, A)-bimodule E and every K-derivation d:A-+E, there exists one and only one
(A, A)-bimodule homomorphismf-.I -*• E such that d =fo $ A .

Note first that, for every (A, A)-bimodule homomorphism/:I -&gt; E,/oS A
is a derivation (no. 7, Proposition 9). Conversely, let cf:A-^E be a K-
derivation; then we prove first that if there exists an (A, A)-bimodule homo-
morphism/: I -&gt; E such that d = /o 8 A ,/is uniquely determined by this condition
for the definition of 8 A gives

f{x &lt;g&gt; 1 - 1 &lt;g&gt; x) = dx

and our assertion follows from the fact that the image of S A already generates
I as a left A-module (Lemma 1) : hence of necessity



fy? x i ®y) = 2,*i-/(i ®yi-yi &lt;S&gt; i) = -2!*i



dy t ,



Conversely, as the mapping (x,y) i-&gt; — Ar.iy of A x A into E is K-bilinear,
there exists one and only one K-linear mapping £:A (g) K A^E such that
g(x ®y) = — x.dy; it suffices to verify that the restriction / of g to I is A-
linear for the left and right A-module structures. The first assertion is obvious

since (xx').dy = x.(x'.dy); to prove the second, note that, if 2* x { (g) y K e I
and xeA, then

2,x i .d(y i x) = 2,Xi.dy t .x + Z (xtfj.dx

but since 2-, x i y i = by definition of I, this completes the proof.

We have thus defined a canonical K-module isomorphism ft-^-fo S A

Hom (A(A) (I,E)-&gt;D K (A,E)

the left hand side being the K-module of (A, A)-bimodule homomorphisms
of A into E.

11. UNIVERSAL PROBLEM FOR DERIVATIONS; COMMUTATIVE CASE

Suppose now that A is a commutative K-algebra and E an A-module; E can be
considered as an (A, A)-bimodule whose two external laws are identical with
the given A-module law. On the other hand the (A, A)-bimodule structure
on A &lt;g) K A is identical with its (A ® K A) -module structure arising from the
commutative ring structure on A ® K A, since in this case, for x, y, u, v in A,

x. (u &lt;g&gt;v).y = (xu) ® {vy) = (xu) &lt;g&gt; (yv) = (x ® y)(u ® v).

The kernel 3 of m is therefore in this case an ideal of the ring A ® K A and,

568



PROBLEM FOR DERIVATIONS; COMMUTATIVE CASE § 10.1 1

as ro: A ® K A -&gt; A is surjective, (A &lt;g) K A)/3 is isomorphic to A; if also E is
considered as an (A &lt;g) K A) -module by means of m (in other words the
(A &lt;g&gt; K A)-module m*(E)), the (A, A)-bimodule homomorphisms 3-&gt;E are
identified with the (A ® K A)-module homomorphisms 3-»E (§4, no. 3), in
other words there is a canonical K-module isomorphism.

Hom (A , A) (3, E) -&gt;Hom A% A (3, E).

On the other hand, 3E = {0}, for the elements 1 ® x - x &lt;g) 1 generate 3
as an (A &lt;g&gt; K A) -module (no. 10, Lemma 1) and, for all z e E,

(1 &lt;g&gt; x - x® l)z =

by virtue of the definition of the (A &lt;g&gt; K A)-module structure on E. Since 3 is
contained in the annihilator of the (A ® K A)-module E and the ((A &lt;g) K A)/3)-
module structure on E is by definition just the initial A-module structure given
on E, there is, taking account of the canonical isomorphism of

3® K ((A&lt;g&gt; K A)/3)

onto 3/3 2 (§4, no. 1, Corollary 1 to Proposition 1), a canonical K-module
isomorphism

Hom A0KA (3, E) -&gt;Hom A (3/3 2 , E).

Taking account of Proposition 17 of no. 10, it is seen that we have proved
the following proposition:

Proposition 18. Let A be a commutative K-algebra and 3 the ideal the kernel of
the surjective canonical homomorphism m:A &lt;g&gt; K A-&gt;A, so that A is isomorphic to
(A (g) K A)/3 and 3/3 2 has canonically an A-module structure. Let &lt;/ A/K :A-&gt;I/P
be the K-linear mapping which associates with every xeAthe class ofx ® 1 — 1 &lt;g&gt; x
modulo 3 2 . The mapping d AIK is a ^.-derivation and, for every A-module E and every
K-derivation D: A -&gt; E, there exists one and only one A-linear mapping g: 3/3 2 -&gt; E
such that D = g o d AtK .

The A-module 3/3 2 is called the A-module ofK-differentials of A and is denoted
by Q K (A) ; for all x e A, d AIK {x) (also denoted by dx) is called the differential
of a:; it has been seen (no. 10, lemma 1) that the elements d AiK {x), for xeA,
form a generating system of the A-module C1 K (A). Proposition 18 shows that the
mapping g (-&gt;• g o d AjK is a canonical A-module isomorphism

&lt;f&gt; A :Hom A (Q K (A), E) ^D K (A, E)

(the A-module structure on D K (A, E) being defined by Proposition 7 of no. 5).

The ordered pair (O k (A), &lt;W) is therefore the solution of the universal
mapping problem where S is the species of A-module structure and the
a-mappings the K-derivations from A to an A-module (Set Theory, IV,
§3, no. 1).

569



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Example. Let M be a K-module; it follows from Proposition 14 of no. 9 that
for every S(M)-module E, the mapping Dh&gt;D|M defines an S(M)-module
isomorphism of D K (S(M), E) onto Hom^M, E) ; on the other hand, since E is
an S(M) -module, Hom K (M, E) is canonically isomorphic to

Hom S(M) (M &lt;g&gt; K S(M), E),

every K-homomorphism of M into E being uniquely expressible in the form

x ^ h(x &lt;g&gt; 1), where

h e Hom S(M) (M ® K S(M), E)

(II, §5, no. 1). Let D be the K-derivation S(M) -&gt;M &lt;g) K S(M) whose
restriction to M is the canonical homomorphism x h-&gt; x (g) 1 ; every K-deriva-
tion D: S(M) -&gt; E can therefore be written uniquely as A o D with

k e Hom S(M) (M ® K S(M), E).

By the uniqueness of a solution of a universal mapping problem, it is seen
that there exists a unique S(M) -module isomorphism

co : M ® K S(M) -&gt; D K (S(M))

such that D o co = d S(U)IK ; in other words, for all x e M, co(# ® 1) — dx.

In particular, i/Mis a free K.-module with basis (^)x eL , Q K (S(M)) is a free
S(M)-module with basis the set of differentials de K . Consider in particular the case
where L = (1, n), so that S(M) is identified with the polynomial algebra
KfX 1} . . ., X n ] (§ 6, no. 6); for every polynomial P e K[X l5 . . ., X n ], we
can write uniquely

n

^P = 2D i P.iX i

with D t P e K[X l5 . . . , X n ] and, by virtue of the above, the mappings P h-&gt; D t P
are the ^.-derivations of K[X X , . . . , X n ] corresponding to the coordinate forms

on Q K (S(M)) for the basis {dXi); we also write -^- instead of D,P and this

is called the partial derivative of P with respect to X 4 .

12. FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES OF K-DIFFERENTIALS

Proposition 19. Let ■

K — P -&gt; K'
I)'
-&gt; A'



be a commutative diagram of commutative ring homomorphisms, yj (resp. •/)') making
570



FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES OF K-DIFFERENTIALS



§ 10.12



A (resp. A') into a K-algebra (resp. K' '-algebra). There exists one and only one
A-linear mapping z&gt;:0 K (A) -&gt; Q K ,(A') rendering commutative the diagram

U —&gt;A&gt;



A —

&lt;*A/K &lt;/a'/K'

n K (A) — &gt; a K ,{A f )

V

d A , /K &gt; ouisa K-derivation of A with values in the A-module Q K -(A') ; the
existence and uniqueness of v then follow from Proposition 18 of no. 11.

The mapping v of Proposition 19 will be denoted by £l(u) ; if there is a
commutative diagram of commutative ring homomorphisms



K



-&gt; K'

-&gt; A'



■&gt; K"



-* A"



it follows immediately from the uniqueness property of Proposition 19 that

Q(u' o u) = Q(«') o Q(«).

Since Cl K .(A') is an A'-module, from Q(u) we derive canonically an A'-
linear mapping



(41)



Q (h):Q k (A) &lt;g&gt; A A'-&gt;Q K ,(A')



such that Q.(u) is the composition of £l (u) and the canonical homomorphism
i A :£l K (A) -&gt; Q K (A) ® A A'. For every A'-module E', there is a commutative
diagram

Hom A ,(Q K ,(A'),E') Hom(n ° (u) ' lE &gt;' ) Hom A ,(Q K (A) ® A A',E')



*A-

D K -(A',E')



G(u)



^a^a

-*D K (A,E)



where C(m) is the mapping Dh-Dok (no. 7, Proposition 9) and r A is the
canonical isomorphism

Hom(z A , l B ,):Hom A ,(Q K (A) &lt;g&gt; A A', E') -&gt; Hom A (Q K (A), E');

this follows immediately from Proposition 19 and the definition of the iso-
morphisms &lt;j&gt; A and &lt;f&gt; A .



571



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Proposition 20. Suppose that A' = A ® K K', with y)':K'-&gt; A' and «:A-» A'
the canonical homomorphisms. Then the A' -linear mapping

Q (u) : Q K (A) ® A A' -&gt; Q^(A')
is an isomorphism.

By virtue of the fact that in diagram (42) the vertical arrows are bijective,
it reduces to proving that, for every A'-module E', the homomorphism
C(a):Di-&gt;Doa in diagram (42) is bijective (II, §2, no. 1, Theorem 1).
Now Hom(w, l E ,):Hom K ,(A ® K K', E') -&gt;Hom K (A, E') is an isomorphism
(II, § 5, no. 1, Proposition 1) and C(u) is its restriction to D K /(A', E') and hence
is injective; moreover, iff: A' -&gt; E' is a K'-linear mapping such that

fou:A-&gt;E'

is a K-derivation, it follows immediately from the fact that /is K'-linear and
the fact that /((* &lt;g) l)(y ® 1)) = (y &lt;g&gt; \)f{x ® 1) + (* &lt;g) l)/(y ® 1) for
at, y in A, that/is a K '-derivation, the elements # &lt;g) 1 for x e A forming a generat-
ing system of the K'-module A'; this completes the proof that C(u) is bijec-
tive.

From now on we confine our attention to the case where p : K -&gt; K' is the
identity mapping of K; every K-algebra homomorphism «:A-&gt;B is therefore
mapped to a B-linear mapping

(43) Q (n) : Q K (A) ® K B -► D K (B).

On the other hand, we can consider the B-module of A-differentials O a (B)
since B is an A-algebra by means of u ; the canonical derivation rf B/A : B -&gt; Q A (B)
being a fortiori a K-derivation, it factorizes uniquely into

B -^&gt; H K (B) — ^&gt; Q A (B)

where Q u is a B-linear mapping (no. 1 1, Proposition 18). For every B-module E,
there is a commutative diagram

Hom B (Q A (B), E) H ° m( ""' lE &gt; Hom B (Q K (B), E)



(44) *A,B



&lt;i&gt;K&gt;I



D A (B,E) : ► D K (B,E)

where j u is the canonical injection (no. 7) ; this follows immediately from
Proposition 1 8 of no. 1 1 .

Proposition 21. The sequence of B-linear mappings

(45) Q K (A) &lt;g&gt; A B -^t Q K (B) -^ Q A (B) -&gt;0

is exact.

572



FUNCTORIAL PROPERTIES OF K-DIFFERENTIALS § 10.12

It reduces to verifying that, for every B-module E, the sequence
-&gt; Hom B (a A (B), E) H ° m(n "' lE &gt; Hom B (Q K (B), E)

Hom(O («). 1e) /r\ f\\ &lt;x Ti 17\

&gt; Hom B (Q K (A) ® A B, E)

is exact (II, §2, no. 1, Theorem 1); but by virtue of the fact that in the
commutative diagrams (42) and (44) the vertical arrows are isomorphisms,
it suffices to show that the sequence

► D A (B, E) -^&gt; D K (B, E) -^&gt; D K (A, E)

is exact, which is just Proposition 11 of no. 7.

We consider now the case where the K-algebra homomorphism m:A-&gt;B
is surjective; if 3 is its kernel, B is then isomorphic to A/3. We consider the
restriction rf|3:3-&gt;0 K (A) of the canonical derivation d = d AIK and the
composite A-linear mapping

d':% -^* n K (A) -^ Q K (A) &lt;g) A B.

Then &lt;/'(3 2 ) = 0, since, for x, y in %,

d'(xy) = d(xy) &lt;g) 1 = (x.dy + y.dx) &lt;g) 1 = dy &lt;g) u{x) + dx ® u(y) =

since u(x) = u(y) = 0. Hence we derive from d', by passing to the quotient,
an A-linear mapping

rf:3/3 2 -&gt;0 K (A) ® A B

and as 3 annihilates the A-module 3/3 2 &gt; disa B-linear mapping.

Proposition 22. Let 3 be an ideal of the commutative K-algebra A, B = A/ 3 and
u: A -&gt; B the canonical homomorphism. The sequence of B-linear mappings

(46) S/3 2 — ^-&gt; Q*(A) ® A B -^l Q K (B) -&gt;0

is then exact.

Note that Q K {A) &lt;g&gt; A B is identified with Q K (A)/3Q K (A) and that the
image of d is the image of &lt;/(3) in this quotient module; the quotient of
K (A) ® A B by Im(5) is therefore identified with the quotient Q K (A)/N,
where N is the sub-A-module generated by 3Q K (A) and i(3). Moreover,
the composite mapping

A -^&gt; Q K (A) &gt; H K (A)/N

is a K-derivation (no. 7, Proposition 9) and, since it is zero on 3 by definition
of N, it defines, when passing to the quotient, a K-derivation D :B -*■ £t K (A) /N.

573



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Taking account of the uniqueness of the solution of a universal mapping
problem, it reduces to proving that, for every B-module E and every K-
derivation D : B -&gt; E, there exists a unique B-linear mapping g: Q K (A)/N -&gt; E
such that D = goD , But, the composite mapping Do«;A-&gt;E is a K-
derivation (no. 7, Proposition 9) and hence there exists one and only one A-
linear mapping/: Q K (A) -» E such that/o d AIK = Do«. This relation shows
already that / is zero on &lt;/(3) ; as also SE = {0} since E is a B-module,/is zero
on 3Q K (A) ; hence/is zero on N and defines, when passing to the quotient, a
B-linear mapping g: Q K (A)/N -»• E such that g o D = D; the uniqueness of g
follows from the uniqueness of/1

It must not be thought that, even if u: A -&gt; B is an injective homomorphism,
Q (u):Q K (A) &lt;g) A B-&gt; Q K (B) is injective (Exercise 5). However we have the
following proposition:

Proposition 23. Let A be an integral K.-algebra, B its field of fractions andw.A -» B
the canonical injection. Then Q ( M ) : ^k(A) (8&gt;a B -&gt; ^k(B) is an isomorphism.

Using the fact that in diagram (42) the vertical arrows are bijective, it
reduces to proving that, for every vector space E over B, the mapping
C(w):D K (B, E) -»D k (A, E) is bijective. But this follows from the fact that
every K-derivation of A into E can be extended uniquely to a K-derivation
of B into E (no. 5, Proposition 5).



§11. COGEBRAS, PRODUCTS OF MULTILINEAR
FORMS, INNER PRODUCTS AND DUALITY

In this paragraph, A is a commutative ring with the trivial graduation. For a graded
A-module M of type N, M* Br will denote the graded A-module of type N, whose
homogeneous elements of degrees n are the A-linear forms which are zero on M. k for all
k # n.

1. COGEBRAS

Definition 1. A cogebra over A (or A-cogebra, or simply cogebra if no confusion
can arise) is a set E with a structure defined by giving the following:

(1) an A-module structure on E;

(2) an A-linear mapping c:E -&gt; E ® A E called the coproduct ofE.

Definition 2. Given two cogebras E, E', whose coproducts are denoted respectively by
c and c', a morphism ofE into E' is an A-linear mapping «;E -&gt; E' such that

(1) (u U) o C 5= c' o U }

574



COGEBRAS § 11-1

in other words, it renders commutative the diagram of h-linear mappings

E - &gt;E'



E0 A E — -&gt; E'&lt;g) A E'

It is immediately verified that the identity mapping is a morphism, that
the composition of two morphisms is a morphism and that every bijective
morphism is an isomorphism.

Examples. (1) The canonical isomorphism A-&gt;A® A A (II, §3, no. 5)
defines an A-cogebra structure on A.

(2) Let E be a cogebra, c its coproduct and a the canonical automorphism
of the A-module E &lt;g) A E such that a(x &lt;g&gt; y) = y &lt;g&gt; x for x e E, y e E; the
A-linear mapping o°c defines a new cogebra structure on E. With this struc-
ture E is called the opposite cogebra to the given cogebra E.

(3) Let B be an A-algebra and let m:B &lt;g) A B -&gt; B be the A-linear mapping
defining multiplication on B (§1, no. 3). The transpose *m is then an A-
linear mapping of the dual B* of the A-module B into the dual (B (g) A B)*
of the A-module B &lt;g) A B. If also B is a finitely generated projective A-module,
the canonical mapping [x : B* ® A B* -&gt;• (B &lt;g&gt; A B) * is an A-module isomorphism
(II, §4, no. 4); the mapping c = fx -1 ° *m is then a coproduct defining a
cogebra structure on the dual B* of the A-module B.

(4) Let X be a set, A (X) the A-module of formal linear combinations of
elements of X with coefficients in A (II, § 1, no. 1 1) and (e x ) xeX the canonical
basis of A (X) . An A-linear mapping c:A (X) -^A (X &gt; ® A A (X) is defined by the
condition c(e x ) = e x ® e x and a canonical cogebra structure is thus obtained
on A&lt; x &gt;.

(5) Let M be an A-module and T(M) the tensor algebra of M (§ 5, no. 1) ;
by II, § 3, no. 9 there exists one and only one A-linear mapping c of
the A-module T(M) into the A-module T(M) &lt;g) A T(M) such that, for all
n ^ 0,

C{X X X 2 ...X n ) = Z, (*!* 2 • • • Xp) ® (*p + l • • • *n)



0&lt;P&lt;»



(3)

for all *, g M (*!* 2 . . . x n denotes the product in the algebra T(M)). Thus
T(M) is given a cogebra structure.

(6) Let M be an A-module and S(M) the symmetric algebra of M (§ 6,
no. 1); the diagonal mapping A: x h&gt; (x, x) of M into M x M is an A-linear
mapping to which there therefore corresponds a homomorphism S(A) of the
A-algebra S(M) into the A-algebra S(M x M) (§ 6, no. 2, Proposition 3). On
the other hand, in § 6, no. 6 we defined a canonical graded algebra isomor-

575



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

phism h: S(M x M) -&gt; S(M) &lt;g) A S(M); by composition we therefore obtain
an K-algebra homomorphism

c = ho S(A) :S(M) -^ S(M) &lt;g&gt; A S(M),

thus defining on S(M) a cogebra structure. For all xeM, by definition
S(A)(*) = (#, x) and the definition of h given in § 6, no. 6 shows that

h((x, x)) = x ® 1 + 1 &lt;S&gt; x.

It follows that c is the unique algebra homomorphism such that, for all x e M,

(4) c(x) =x®l+l®i

As c is an algebra homomorphism, it follows that, for every sequence (*i)i&lt;i&lt; n
of n elements of M,

n

(5) c(x x x 2 . . . x n ) = ]TI ( Xi 1 + 1 ® x t )

= Z (x h . . . x ip ) ® (x n ...x in _ p )

the summation on the right hand side of (5) being taken over all ordered
pairs of strictly increasing sequences (in some cases empty)

i x &lt; i 2 &lt; ... &lt; i p , j\ &lt;j 2 &lt; • • • &lt; i n _ p

of elements of (1, n), whose sets of elements are complementary. The element
c(x x x 2 . . . x n ) is an element of total degree n in S(M) (g) A S(M) and its com-
ponent of bidegree (p, n — p) is

(") Z \ x o(X) • • • x o(p)) ® ( x a(p + 1) • • • x oWi)

a

where the summation is taken over all permutations a e S n which are increas-
ing in each of the intervals (l,/&gt;) and (/» + 1, «).

(7) Let M be an A-module and proceed with the exterior algebra A(M)
as with S(M) in Example 6; the diagonal mapping A:M -&gt; M x M this time
defines a homomorphism A (A) of the A-algebra A (M) into the A-algebra

A (M x M) (§ 7, no. 2, Proposition 2) ; on the other hand there is a canonical
graded algebra isomorphism

h:A{M x M) -&gt; A(M) *® A A(M)
(§7, no. 7, Proposition 10), whence by composition there is an algebra
homomorphism c — h o A(A):A(M) -&gt; A(M) *&lt;g) A A(M), which can be
considered as an A-module homomorphism A (M) -» A (M) ® A A (M) and
which therefore defines on A(M) a cogebra structure. It can be proved as
in Example 6 that c is the unique algebra homomorphism such that, for all
xeM,

(7) c{x) = x &lt;g) 1 + 1 &lt;8&gt; x,

576



COGEBRAS §H.l

whence, for every sequence (*j)i&lt;i&lt; n of elements of M,

c{x 1 A x 2 A • • • A x n ) = (x x ® 1 + 1 (g&gt; x t ) A . . . A (x tt ® 1 + 1 &lt;g&gt; * n )
where the product on the right hand side is taken in the algebra

A(M)«® A A(M);
to calculate this product, consider, for every ordered pair of strictly increasing
sequences i x &lt; i 2 &lt; • • • &lt; i p , j\ &lt; j 2 &lt; • • • &lt;Jn- P of elements of (1, n),
whose sets of elements are complementary, the product y x y 2 • . . y M where
y ih = x ih &lt;g&gt; 1 (1 s$ h ^ p) and y, te = 1 (g) tf ite (1 *$ k ^ n — p) and the sum

is taken over all these products. As the graded algebra A(M) g ® A A(M) is
anticommutative and the elements x t ® 1 and 1 &lt;g) * 4 are of total degree 1,
by § 4, no. 6, Lemma 3 and Lemma 1,

(8) c(x ± Ax 2 A • • • A x n )

= 2 (-l) v (* fl A • • • A x ip ) ® (x h A ... A *, n _ p )

v being the number of ordered pairs (A, k) such thatj fc &lt; i fc and the summation
being taken over the same set as in (5). The element c(x x A • • • A x n ) is of

total degree n in A(M) e &lt;S&gt; A A(M) and its homogeneous component of bi-
degree (p, n — p) is equal to

(9) 2, 8a(*a(l) A • • • A * a(p) ) (g) (X c(p + i) A • • • A * a(n) )

the summation being taken over permutations a e 6 n which are increasing in
each of the intervals (l,/&gt;) and (/&gt; + 1, «).

When in future we speak of A (X) , T(M), S(M) or A(M) as cogebras, we
shall mean, unless otherwise mentioned, with the cogebra structures defined
in Examples 4, 5, 6 and 7 respectively.

(8) Let E, F be two A-cogebras and c, c' their respective coproducts. Let
t: (E ® a E) ® a (F ® a F) -» (E ® A F) &lt;g) A (E &lt;g) A F) denote the associativity
isomorphism such that t((x ® x') ® (y ®y')) = (x ®y) &lt;g&gt; (#' &lt;8&gt;y') for
x, x' in E and y, y' in F. Then the composite linear mapping

E &lt;g) A F -^U (E &lt;g&gt; A E) ® A (F &lt;g&gt; A F) — U (E ® A F) ® A (E ® A F)

defines a cogebra structure on the A-module E &lt;g) A F, called the tensor product
of the cogebras E and F.

Let E be a cogebra and A a commutative monoid. A graduation (E X )^ 6A
on the A-module E is said to be compatible with the coproduct c of E if c is a
graded homomorphism of degree O of the graded A-module E into the
graded A-module (of type A) E &lt;g) A E, in other words (II, § 11, no. 5) if

(10) c(E0&lt;= b+ 2 x E w ® a E ¥ .

577



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

In what follows, we shall most often limit our attention to graduations of
type N compatible with the coproduct; a cogebra with such a graduation
will also be called a graded cogebra. If F is another graded cogebra, a graded
cogebra morphism (j&gt;:E -&gt;■ F is by definition a cogebra morphism (Definition 2)
which is also a graded homomorphism of degree of graded A-modules.

Examples. (9) It is immediate that the cogebras T(M), S(M) and A(M)
defined above are graded cogebras.

2. COASSOCIATIVITY, COCOMMUTATIVITY, COUNIT

Let E be a cogebra, c its coproduct, N, N', N" three A-modules and m a bi-
linear mapping of N x N' into N*. Let m : N ® A N' -* N" denote the A-linear
mapping corresponding to m. If u:E -&gt; N, v:E -&gt; N' are two A-linear map-
pings, we derive an A-linear mapping u &lt;g&gt; z&gt;:E ® A E-&gt;N &lt;g) A N' and a com-
posite A-linear mapping of E into N":

(11) m(u,v):E -U E &lt;g&gt; A E -^ N &lt;g&gt; A N' -^&gt; N*.

Clearly we have thus defined an A-bilinear mapping (w, v) t-&gt; m(u, v) of
Hom A (E, N) x Hom A (E, N') into Hom A (E, N").

When E is a graded cogebra, N, N', N" graded A-modules of the same type
and m a graded homomorphism of degree k of N ® A N' into N", then, if u
(resp. v) is a graded homomorphism of degree p (resp. q), m(u, v) is a graded
homomorphism of degree p + q + k.

Examples. (1) Take E to be the graded cogebra T(M) (no. 1) and suppose that
N, N', N" have the trivial graduation. A graded homomorphism of degree
—p of T(M) into N (resp. N', N") then corresponds to a multilinear mapping
of M p into N (resp. N', N"). Given a multilinear mapping u: M p -&gt; N and a
multilinear mapping v: M'-^N', the above method allows us to deduce a
multilinear mapping m(u, v) : M p+q -&gt;• N" called the product (relative to m) of u
and v. Formulae (3) (no. 1) and (11) show that, for x u . .., x p - q in M,

(m(w, »))(*!, . . ., x p+q ) = m(u(x 1} . . ., x p ), v(x p+1&gt; . . ., x p+q )).

(2) Take E to be the graded cogebra S(M) (no. 1), preserving the same
hypotheses on N, N', N". A graded homomorphism of degree — p of S(M) into
N then corresponds to a symmetric multilinear mapping of M p into N (§ 6, no. 3).
Then we derive from a symmetric multilinear mapping u: M P -&gt;N and a
symmetric multilinear mapping v: M 9 -&gt; N' a symmetric multilinear mapping
m(u, v) : M p+q -&gt; N", also denoted (to avoid confusion) by u. m v (or even u.v)
and called the symmetric product (relative to m) of u and v. Formulae (6) (no. 1)
and (11) show that, for x 1} . . ., x p+q in M,

578



COASSOCIATIVITY, COCOMMUTATIVITY, COUNIT § 11.2

(u. m i&gt;)(* l3 . . ., x p+q ) = 2, m(u(x aa) , . . .,x a(p) ), v(x a(p + 1) , . . ., *o&lt;p+9&gt;))

the summation being taken over permutations a e e p + q which are increasing
on each of the intervals (l,/&gt;) and (/&gt; + \,p + q).

(3) Take E to be the graded cogebra A(M) (no. 1). Then we deduce
similarly from an alternating multilinear mapping u: M p -&gt;N and an alter-
nating multilinear mapping v: M q -&gt;N' an alternating multilinear mapping
m{u, v) : M p+a -&gt; N", also denoted by u A m voru A v and called the alternating
product (relative to m) of u and v. Formulae (9) (no. 1) and (11) show in this
case that, for x 1} . . . , x p+q in M,

(« A m »)(*i, • • -, X p + q) = 2&lt; S a m(M(* a(1) , . . ., # (p))j K*a(p + 1)&gt; • • •&gt; *a&lt;p + «&gt;))

the summation again being taken over permutations ae0 p+q which are
increasing on each of the intervals (l,/&gt;) and (/&gt; + l,/&gt; + q\

We return to the case where E is an arbitrary graded cogebra (of type N)
and assume that the three modules N, N', N" are all equal to the underlying
A-module of a graded A-algebra B of type Z, the mapping m being multiplica-
tion in B, so that m:B &lt;g&gt; A B -+ B is a graded A-linear mapping of degree 0.
Thus a graded A-algebra structure is obtained on the graded A-module
Homgr A (E, B) = C.

In particular, suppose that B = A (with the trivial graduation), so that
Homgr A (E, A) is the graded dual E* Br , which thus has a graded A-algebra
structure.

Let F be another graded cogebra c' its coproduct and &lt;j&gt;:E -&gt; F a graded
cogebra morphism (no. 1) ; then the canonical graded morphism

$ = Hom((i&gt;, 1 B ) : Homgr A (F, B) -*- Homgr A (E, B)

is a graded algebra homomorphism. For u, v in Homgr A (F, B) and xeE,

($(w))(*) = («0(&lt;K*)) = m{{u®v){c'${x)))).

But by hypothesis *'(&lt;K*)) = ($ ® 4&gt;) (*(*))&gt; hence

(« &lt;g&gt; »)(*'((*))) = ($(«) ® $(»))(«(*))

and therefore $(iw) = $(«)?(*)&gt; which proves our assertion.

In particular, the graded transpose *c|&gt;:F* gr -^E* Br is a graded algebra
homomorphism.

579



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Remark. Suppose that the E p are finitely generated projective A-modules, so
that the graded A-modules (E ® A E)* er and E** P ® A E* er can be canonic-
ally identified (II, §4, no. 4, Corollary 1 to Proposition 4). If also the
A-modules A ® A A and A are then canonically identified (II, § 3, no. 4),
the linear mapping E* er ® A E* sr -&gt; E* er which defines multiplication in
E* er can be called the graded transpose of the coproduct c.

Proposition 1. Let E be a cogebra over A. In order that, for every associative A-
algebra B, the A-algebra Hom A (E, B) be associative, it is necessary and sufficient
that the coproduct c:E -&gt; E &lt;g&gt; A E be such that the diagram



(12)



be commutative.



E &gt; E A E

1e® «

E0 A E — -&gt; E0 A E0 A E

c® 1e



Let B be an associative A-algebra and u, v, w three elements of
G = Hom A (E, B). Let m 3 denote the A-linear mapping B A B A B-&gt;B
which maps b b' b" to bb'b". By definition of the product on the algebra
C, (uv)w is the composite mapping

E &gt; E 0E =&gt; E 0E 0E — » B 0B 0B -+ B

whilst u{vw) is the composite mapping

E— ^-^E0E-i^&gt;E0E0E^^B0B0B W3 , B.

It follows that if diagram (12) is commutative, the algebra Hom A (E, B)
is associative for every associative A-algebra B. To establish the converse, it
suffices to show that there exists an associative A-algebra B and three A-linear
mappings u, v, w of E into B such that the mapping m 3 o (u v w) of
E E E into B is injective. Take B to be the A-algebra T(E) and u, v, w the
canonical mapping of E into T(E). The mapping m z o [u v w) is then
the canonical mapping E E E = T 3 (E) -&gt;■ T(E), which is injective.

When the cogebra E satisfies the condition of Proposition 1, it is said to
be coassociative.

Examples. (4) It is immediately verified that the cogebra A (no. 1, Example (1)
the cogebra A (x) (no. 1, Example 4) and the cogebra T(M) (no. 1, Example 5)
are coassociative. If B is an associative A-algebra which is a finitely generated
projective A-module, the cogebra B* (no. 1, Example 3) is coassociative: for
the commutativity of diagram (12) then follows by transposition from that of
the diagram which expresses the associativity of B (§ 1, no. 3). Conversely, the

580



COASSOCIATIVITY, COCOMMUTATIVITY, COUNIT



§11.2



same argument and the canonical identification of the A-module B with its
bidual (II, § 2, no. 7, Corollary 4 to Proposition 13) show that if the cogebra
B* is coassociative, the algebra B is associative. Finally, the cogebras S(M) and
A(M) (no. 1, Examples 6 and 7) are coassociative; this follows from the com-
mutativity of the diagram



M



A

M x M



Axl,



-&gt; M x M

l M xA

-&gt; M x M x M



the functorial properties of S(M) (§ 6, no. 2) and A (M) (§ 7, no. 2), which give
the corresponding commutative diagrams



(14)



S(M)

S(A)

S(M x M)
A(M) —

A (A)

Y

A(M x M)



S(A)



S(Axl M )
A (A)



A(Axl M )



—► S(M x M)

S(A M xl)

- S(M x M x M)

-&gt; A(M x M)

A(1m*A)

T

A(M x M x M)



and the existence and functoriality of canonical isomorphisms for symmetric
and exterior algebras of a direct sum (§ 6, no. 6 and § 7, no. 7).

Proposition 2. Let E be a cogebra over A. In order that, for every commutative
A-algebra B, the A-algebra Hom A (E, B) be commutative, it is necessary and sufficient
that the coproduct c:E -&gt; E ® A E be such that the diagram



E



(15)



\



E A E — &gt; E &lt;g) A E




(where &lt;j is the symmetry homomorphism such that a(x y) = y (g) #) is
commutative (in other words, it suffices that the cogebra E be identical with its
opposite (no. 1, Example 2).

Let B be a commutative A-algebra and u, v two elements of C = Hom A (E, B) .



581



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

By definition of the product in G, uv and vu are respectively equal to the com-
posite mappings



and



_ c __ _ u®v _ _ m

E &gt; E ® E &gt; B®B — &gt; B



E-UE&lt;g&gt;E^B&lt;2&gt;B-^B.



It follows that if diagram (15) is commutative the algebra Hom A (E, B) is
commutative for every commutative A-algebra B. To establish the converse,
it suffices to show that there exist a commutative A-algebra B and two A-
linear mappings u, v of E into B such that m ° (u &lt;g&gt; v) :E (g&gt; E -+B is injec-
tive. Take B to be the algebra S(E © E) and u (resp. v) the composition of
the canonical mapping E®E-&gt;S(E©E) and the mapping #i-&gt;(x, 0)
(resp. *.-&gt; (0, *)) of E into E © E. If A:S(E) ® S(E) -&gt; S(E E) is the
canonical isomorphism (§6, no. 6, Proposition 9) and X:E-&gt;S(E) is the
canonical mapping, then h~ x o m o (u ® v) — X (g&gt; X. Now X &lt;g&gt; X is infec-
tive, for X(E) is a direct factor of S(E) (II, § 3, no. 7, Corollary 5 to Proposi-
tion 7).

When the cogebra E satisfies the condition of Proposition 2, it is said to be
cocommutative.

Examples. (5) It is immediate that the cogebra A (no. 1, Example 1) and the
cogebra A (X) (II, § 11, no. 1, Example 4) are cocommutative. It follows from
formula (5) of no. 1 that the cogebra S(M) is cocommutative. Finally, for an
A-algebra B such that the A-module B is projective and finitely generated to
have the property that the cogebra B* (no. 1, Example 3) is cocommutative, it
is necessary and sufficient that B be commutative; for (using the canonical
identification of the A-module B with its bidual (II, § 2, no. 7)), this follows
from the fact that the commutativity of diagram (14) is equivalent by transposi-
tion to that of the diagram which expressed the commutativity of B (§ 1,
no. 3).

Proposition 3. Let E be a cogebra over A. In order that, for every unital A-algebra B,
the A-algebra Hom A (E, B) be unital, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist a
linear form y on E rendering commutative the diagrams

E — "-&gt; E ® A E E -U&gt; E ® A E



Y® 1]



1b®Y



(16)

A® A E E&lt;g) A A

where &lt;r:E^E ® A E is the coproduct and h' and h" the canonical isomorphisms

582



CO ASSOCIATIVITY, COCOMMUTATIVITY, COUNIT §11.2

(II, § 3, no. 4, Proposition 4). The unit o/Hom A (E, B) is then the linear mapping
x*-&gt;y{x)\ (where 1 denotes the unit element of B).

Let y be a linear form on E rendering diagram (16) commutative. Let B
be a unital A-algebra with unit element 1, Y):A-&gt;B the canonical mapping
and v = 7) o y the element of the A-algebra G = Hom A (E, B). For every
element ueC, uv is the composite mapping

(17) E &gt; E®E -=--&gt; E ®A i&gt;B®B &gt; B.

Then uv = m o (u r)) o h" = u. It is similarly proved that vu = u and hence
v is unit element of C. Conversely, let the A-module A E be given a unital
algebra structure such that {a, x) (a', x') = [aa', ax' + a'x) for a, a' in A and
x, x' in E. Let B denote the A-algebra thus defined and let C be the A-algebra
Hom A (E, B). Suppose that C is unital and let e:x^&gt;- (y(x), a(#)) be its unit
element (where y(x) e A and X(#) e E). On the other hand let/ be the element
x &gt;-&gt; (0, x) of G. An immediate calculation shows that/* is the element

*-^(0,(A")- 1 ((1 b ®y)(«(*))))
of G. The condition^ =/ implies the commutativity of the second diagram
of (16) and it is similarly seen that the condition ef = /implies the commuta-
tivity of the first diagram of (16).

A linear form yonE rendering diagrams (16) commutative is called a
counit of the cogebra E. A cogebra admits at most one counit: for it is the unit
element of the algebra Hom A (E, A). A cogebra with a counit is called counital.

Examples. (6) The identity mapping is the counit of the cogebra A; on the
cogebra A (X) (no. 1, Example 4) the linear form y such that y(e x ) = 1 for all

x e X is the counit. On the cogebra T(M) (resp. S(M), A (M)) the linear form y

such that y(1) = 1 and y(z) = for z in the T n (M) (resp. S n (M), A n (M)) for
n ^ 1 is the counit. Finally, let B be an A-algebra which is a finitely generated
projective A-module and has a unit element e; then on the cogebra B* (no. 1,
Example 3) the linear form y: x* \-&gt; &lt;g, **&gt; is the counit, for this form is just the
transpose of the A-linear mapping yj e : £ h-&gt; fy of A into B and by transposition
the commutativity of diagrams (16) follows from that of the diagrams which
express (using y] e ) the fact that e is unit element of B (§1, no. 3); the same
argument moreover shows that conversely, if the cogebra B* admits a counit y,
the transpose of y defines a unit element e = 'y(I) of B.

Proposition 4. Let E be a cogebra admitting a counit y and suppose that there exists
in E an element e such that y(e) = 1; then E is the direct sum of the sub-A-modules
Ae and E Y = Ker(Y) and



c(e) = e e (mod. E v E Y )

e + e x (mod. E v E Y ) for all x e E Y .



(18) t« - .

583



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

The first assertion is immediate, for y{x — y(x)e) = and the relation
y(cce) = implies a = 0. Let c(e) = 2* s t t i} so that

e = Z, y{s t )t t = Z, y{t t )s t

by (16) and 1 = y(e) = 2, yO^yOQ- Therefore

i fa ~ Yfa)') fa - y{ti)e) = 2, J, /, - 2, * yfa)*!

- ^ Y(^« O «

+ ^ Yfa)* ® Yfa)«

which, by the above relation, is just c(e) — e ® e; this therefore proves the
first relation of (18). On the other hand the decomposition of E E as a
direct sum

A(e e) ((Ae) E Y ) (E Y (Ae)) (E Y E Y )
allows us to write, for xeE y , c(x) = X(e e) + (e y) +^®«) + m where

u = 2, z&gt;y Wj, y, z and the v } and z# y belong to E Y . The definition of the

i

counit y then gives x="ke+y = Xe + z and, as y(x) = 0, necessarily
X = 0, a; = y = z, whence the second relation of (18).

Remark. Let C be a counital coassociative A-coalgebra, B a unital associative
A-algebra and M a left B-module. The A-bilinear mapping (b, m) i-&gt; bm of
B x M into M defines an A-bilinear mapping

Hom A (C, B) x Hom A (C, M) -&gt; Hom A (C, M)

by the general procedure described at the beginning of this no. It is immedi-
ately verified that this mapping defines on Hom A (G, M) a left module struc-
ture over the ring Hom A (C, B).

3. PROPERTIES OF GRADED GOGEBRAS OF TYPE N

Proposition 5. (i) Let E be a graded cogebra admitting a counit y; then y is a
homogeneous linear form of degree 0.

(ii) Suppose further that there exists an element e eE such that E = Ae and

y(e) = 1. Then the kernel TL^ofyis equal to E + = 2, E n , c(e) =«®« and

(19) c(x) = x &lt;S&gt;e + e 0x (mod. E + E + )

for all x eE + .

584



BIGEBRAS AND SKEW-BIGEBRAS § 11.4

(i) It suffices to verify that y(#) =0 for x e E B , for all n ^ 1. Since c is a
graded homomorphism of degree 0,

( 2 °) «M " .£. (??« ® «..-/)

with, for all j such that &lt; j &lt; «, y iy and z tJ in E,; applying (16) (no. 2) we

obtain

* = o&lt;?&lt;.(?V(y tf K.-y) = ^ &lt;it (^Y(^.-y)yi/).
whence, equating the components of degree and degree n on the two sides

* = ^Y(l/io)zin = Zy{z i0 )y in
= 2, V{yin)z i0 = Z i{z in )y i0

and therefore y(*) = Z, y(y in )y(z i0 ) = y(0) = 0.

(ii) Since Ker(y) and E + are both supplementary sub-A-modules of
Ae = E and E + &lt;= Ker(y) by (i), E + = Ker(y) (II, § 1, no. 8, Remark 1);
the other assertions follow from Proposition 4 of no. 2.

Proposition 6. Let E be a graded cogebra over A. In order that, for every commutative
A-algebra B, with the trivial graduation, the graded A-algebra of type Z Homgr A (E, B)
(no. 2) be anticommutative (§ 4, no. 9, Definition 7), it is necessary and sufficient that,
ifa 9 denotes the automorphism of the A-module E (g) A E such that

a g (x P ®x q ) = (-l) pq x q 0x p
for x p e E p , x q e E Q , where p and q are arbitrary elements ofS, the diagram

E

(21)




be commutative.

The proof is analogous to that of Proposition 2 of no. 2.

When the graded cogebra E satisfies the condition of Proposition 6, it is
said to be anticocommutative.

Example. It follows immediately from formula (8) of no. 1 that for every A-

module M, the graded cogebra A (M) is anticocommutative.

4. BIGEBRAS AND SKEW-BIGEBRAS

Definition 3. A graded bigebra (resp. skew graded bigebra) over a ring A is a
set E with a graded A-algebra structure of type N and a graded A-cogebra structure of
type N, with the same underlying graded A-module structure and such that:
(1) The A-algebra E is associative and unital.

585



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(2) The A-cogebra E is coassociative and counital.

(3) The coproduct c:E-&gt;E ® A E is a homomorphism of the graded algebra E
into the graded algebra E (g) A E (resp. graded algebra E B (g) A E (cf. § 4, no. 7)).

(4) The counit yoflLisa homomorphism of the graded algebra E into the algebra
A (with the trivial graduation) such that, if e denotes the unit element of the A-algebra

If E is a graded bigebra whose graduation is trivial, E is called simply a
bigebra. A graded bigebra is called commutative (resp. cocommutative) if
the underlying algebra is commutative (resp. if the underlying cogebra is
cocommutative); a skew graded bigebra is called anticommutative (resp.
anticocommutative) if the underlying graded algebra is anticommutative
(resp. if the underlying graded cogebra is anticocommutative) .

It follows from Definition 3 and no. 2, Proposition 5 that, for a graded
bigebra or a skew graded bigebra E,

{c(e) = e &lt;S&gt; e
c(x) =x®e+e®x (mod. E + ® E + ) for x e E + = v±) E n .



If E and F are two graded bigebras (resp. two skew graded bigebras), a
mapping § : E -&gt; F is called a graded bigebra morphism (resp. skew graded bigebra
morphism) if: (1) &lt;j&gt; is a graded algebra morphism (and hence maps the unit
element of E to the unit element of F) ; (2) &lt;j&gt; is a graded cogebra morphism
such that, if y and y' are the respective counits of E and F, then y = y' o &lt;j&gt;.

Examples. (1) Let S be a monoid with identity element u, so that the algebra
E = A (S) of the monoid S over A admits the unit element e u (§ 2, no. 6) ; it has
been seen on the other hand that E has canonically a coassociative cocommuta-
tive A-cogebra structure with a counit y such that y(tf s ) = 1 for all s e S (no. 1,
Example 4 and no. 2, Examples 4, 5 and 6). The formula c(e s ) = e s ® e s giving
the coproduct shows also immediately that c is an algebra homomorphism.
Thus a cocommutative bigebra structure has been defined on E and E, with this
structure, is called the bigebra of the monoid S over A.

If T is another monoid with unit element v, f : S -&gt; T a homomorphism
such that/(«) = v and/ (A) : A (S) -&gt; A (T) the A-algebra homomorphism derived
from/ (§ 2, no. 6), it is immediately verified that/ (A) is a bigebra homomorphism.

(2) Let M be an A-module. The graded A-algebra (§6, no. 1) and graded
A-cogebra (no. 1, Example 6) structures defined on S(M) define on this set a
commutative cocommutative graded bigebra structure; for we have seen (no. 1,
Example 6) that the coproduct on S(M) is an algebra homomorphism and it

586



THE GRADED DUALS T(M)* gr , S(M) * gr AND A (M) * gr § 1 1 .5

follows from the definition of the counit y (no. 2, Example 6) that y(l) = 1 and
that y is an algebra homomorphism of E into A.

(3) Let M be an A-module. We see as in Example 2 that the graded A-algebra
(§ 7, no. 1) and graded A-cogebra (no. 1, Example!) structures on A(M) define
on this set an anticommutative anticocommutative skew graded bigebra structure.

Remark. If M is an A-module such that M &lt;g) A M # {0}, the graded A-
algebra (§ 5, no. 1) and graded A-cogebra (no. 1, Example 5) structures on
T(M) do not define a bigebra structure, for in general

for four elements x 1} x 2 , yi, y 2 of M, as formula (3) of no. 1, shows.

5. THE GRADED DUALS T(M)** r , S(M)** r AND A(M)** r

From now on we return to the general conventions of the chapter on algebras, which will
therefore be assumed {unless otherwise mentioned) to be associative and unital.

Let M be an A-module; the graded A-cogebra structures defined on T(M)
(no. 1, Example 5), S(M) (no. 1, Example 6) and A(M) (no. 1, Example 7) allow
us to define canonically on the graded duals T(M)* gr , S(M)* Br and A(M)** r
graded algebra structures of type N, by virtue of no. 2, Propositions 1 and 3 and
the convention made on the graduation of the graded dual of a graded
module (no. 1). Moreover, the graded algebra S(M)* Kr is commutative (no. 2,

Proposition 2 and Example 5) and the graded algebra A (M)* Br is anticommuta-
tive (no. 3, Proposition 6 and Example). In A(M)* gr every element of degree 1 is of
zero square\ such an element is identified with a linear form f on M and its
square is the alternating bilinear form/ A /on M 2 such that

(fAf)(x,y) =f(x)f(y) -f(y)f(x)

(no. 2, Example 3).

Let N be another A-module and u an A-linear mapping of M into N. We
know that u defines canonically graded algebra homomorphisms



(23)



T(«):T(M)-&gt;T(N)

S(«):S(M)-&gt;S(N)

/\(«):A(M)-^A(N)



(§ 5, no. 2, § 6, no. 2 and § 7, no. 2). It is immediately verified in formula (3) of
no. 1 that T(m) is also a cogebra morphism. On the other hand, if A M (resp. A N )

587



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

denotes the diagonal mapping M -&gt; M x M (resp. N -&gt; N x N), there is the
relation (u x u) ° A M = A N o u; it follows that S(w x u) © S(A M ) = S(A N ) o S(u)

(resp. A(«x«)o A(A M ) = A(A N ) © A(k)).

Using the definition of coproduct in S(M) and A(M) (no. 1, Examples 6 and 7)
and the functorial character of the canonical isomorphisms

S(M x M) -&gt; S(M) ® A S(M)

and A(M x M) -&gt; A(M) g ® A A(M), it is seen that S(w) and A (a) are also
cogebra morphisms^ (and hence in this case bigebra morphisms). It follows
immediately that the graded transposes (II, § 11, no. 6) of the homomorphisms
(23)

T( M ):T(N)* Br -&gt;T(M)* Br

t S( M ):S(N)* gr -&gt;S(M)* Br

'A (m) : A (N) ** r -&gt; A (M) ** r
are graded algebra homomorphisms.

We now note that the dual M* of M is identified with the submodule of

elements of degree 1 in T(M)* gr (resp. S(M)* Kr , A(M)* gr ). It therefore
follows from the universal property of the tensor algebra (§ 5, no. 1) and the
universal property of the symmetric algebra (§ 6, no. 1) that there exists one and
only one graded algebra homomorphism

6 T :T(M*)-&gt;T(M)* gr

which extends the canonical injection M* -&gt;T(M)* gr , and one and only one graded
algebra homomorphism

e s :S(M*)-&gt;-S(M)* gr

which extends the canonical injection M* -&gt; S(M)* Br . On the other hand, the
canonical injection of M* in the opposite algebra to A(M)* gr is such that the
square of every element of M* is zero; hence (§ 7, no. 1, Proposition 1) there
exists one and only one graded algebra homomorphism

6 A :A(M*)-&gt;(A(M)** r )°
which extends the canonical injection M* -&gt; /\(M)* gT .% These homomorphisms



f This also follows from formulae (5) and (9) of no. 1 .

J This injection is extended to a homomorphism into the opposite algebra to
A(M)* 8r instead of a homomorphism into A(M)* gr for reasons of convenience in
the calculations.

588



THE GRADED DUALS T(M)** r , S(M)* gr AND A (M)** r § 1 1.5

are functorial: for example, for every A-module homomorphism «:M-^N
the diagram

T(N*) -3* T(M*)



6T



6t



T ( N )* gr i^f T ( M )* Br

is commutative, as follows immediately from the universal property of the
tensor algebra (§5, no. 1); there are analogous commutative diagrams for
6 S and 0/\.

We shall find the homomorphisms T , 8 S and 6 A explicitly. For this we con-
sider more generally a coassociative A-cogebra E with coproduct c and define
by induction on n, for n ^ 2, the linear mapping £ n ofE into E® n by c 2 = cand

(24) c n = (c n . x l E )o C .

On the other hand we denote by m n : A® n -+ A the canonical linear mapping
such that m n (% x l 2 . • . l n ) = ^ . . . £ n and note that, for n ^ 2,

(25) m n = m°(m n _ 1 ®l A )

writing m = m 2 . With this notation:

Lemma 1. (i) In the associative algebra E* = Hom A (E, A), the product of n
elements u X} u 2) . . .,u n of degree 1 is given by

(26) u x u 2 . . . u n = m n o {u x u 2 • • • ®a„)o f(| .

(ii) Suppose also that the cogebra E is graded. Then, in the graded associative
algebra E** r = Homgr A (E, A), the product of n elements u x , u 2) ...,u n of degree 1
is given by

(27) u x u 2 . . . u n = m n o (u x u 2 • • • ® « n ) o B n

where $ n :E -* E® n is the linear mapping which maps each x e E to the component of
c n (x) of multidegree (1, 1, . . ., 1).

Formula (26) is just the definition of the product in E* for n = 2; to prove
it by induction on n, observe that
u x u 2 ...u n

= m o ((u x u 2 . . . u n _ x ) u n ) o c

= m o ((OT n _! o {u x U 2 • • • U n . x ) o C n _ x ) &lt;g)U n )o C

= m° (m n _j 1 A ) o (u x u 2 • • • u n _ x w n ) o (c n _ x 1 E ) o c
= m n o (u x u 2 • • • W n ) o c n

by virtue of (24), (25), II, § 3, no. 3, formula (5) and the relation

589



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

When E is graded and the elements u t eE* gT homogeneous of degree 1,
then by definition for homogeneous elements x t e E,

(«i ® a a ® ' • * ® M n)(*l &lt;S&gt; *2 ® ' ' • &lt;8&gt; x n) =
unless all the * t are of degree 1, whence formula (27).

It follows from formulae (3), (5) and (7) of no. 1 and formula (24) that when

E is taken to be one of the three graded cogebras T(M), S(M) and A(M), we
obtain respectively by induction on n (using the fact that the coproduct is a
graded homomorphism of degree 0), for x 1} x 2) , . ., x n in M:

when E = T(M), 8 n (*i*2 • • • *n) = x i ® x 2 ® • • * &lt;8&gt; x n

when E = S(M), 8 n (^x 2 ...*„) = Z * oa) ® x a(2) ® • • • ® * a(n)

«.A» «....,."?„..«....w

It suffices to note, for example when E = A(M), that in the expression

c n {x x x 2 ...x n ) = (c n _ 1 1 E )VZ, ( - 1)^ . . . x ip ) &lt;g&gt; (* yi . . . * /n _ p )) arising
from formula (8) of no. 1, the only terms which can give a term of multidegree
(1, 1,. . ., 1) are those for which n — p = 1 and hence

o n (x 1 x 2 . . . x n )

is the term of multidegree (1, !,...,!) in the sum



Z i (-l) n_, c n _ 1 (x 1 . . . *i_i* l + 1 . . . x n ) &lt;g) x t
and this term is necessarily equal to

n
Z^ ( -l) n-i &amp; n -l(*l • • • *l-l*i + l • • • *n) &lt;8&gt; X tt

whence the result by the induction hypothesis.

Using Lemma 1, the product in T(M)* gr of n linear forms x*, x 2 , *■*
of M* is given by



■&gt; •*»



(28) (xtx$ ...**, x x x 2 . . . x n y = O &lt;*?, *,&gt;

for # ( e M (1 ^ i ^ «) ; the product of these n forms in S(M)* Br is given by

n / n \

(29) &lt;*f *J ... 4, *!* 2 . . . x n y = Z in &lt;** (t) , * 4 &gt; ) ;
590



THE GRADED DUALS T(M)* gr , S(M)* gr AND A (M)* Br § 11.5

finally, the product of these forms in A(M)* Br is given by
(30) &lt;*?*? ...x* t x y x 2 . . . * B &gt; = det«*f , *,» .

In each of the three cases, we have respectively

0t(*i ® x * ® • • ■ &lt;8&gt; x$) = **** • • • x*

«s(*l#2 • • • X n ) = X±X 2 . . . X n

6a(^ A x* A • • • A **) = *S4U ■ • • x x = (-l)*-«»**** . . . x *
and hence we deduce from (28), (29) and (30) the relations

n

(28 bis) &lt;e T (*? &lt;g&gt; 4 ® • • • ® x*), * x &lt;g&gt; x 2 ® • • • &lt;g&gt; *„&gt; = EI &lt;xf, x,&gt;

(in other words 0t restricted to T 2 (M*) is just the canonical homomorphism
of II, §4, no. 4)

(29 bis) &lt;6s(*i** • • • x*), x ± x 2 . . . * n &gt; = Z, \\ I &lt;** (J) , *,&gt; I

(30 bis) &lt;G A (*f A ** A • • • A x*), x x A x 2 A • • • A * n &gt;

= (-l^-^MetK*?,*,)).

Proposition 7. Let M fo a finitely generated projective A-module. Then the canonical
homomorphisms 6 T :T(M*) -&gt;T(M)* gr and A :A(M*) -&gt; (A(M)* gr )° arc W-
jective. Also the graded dual A(M)** r is then equal to the dual A(M)* of the A-
modwfe A(M).

Suppose first that M has definite basis («0i&lt;i &lt;m and let (ef) 1&lt;i&lt;m be the
dual basis of M* (II, § 10, no. 4). Formula (28 bis) shows that, for every finite
sequence s = (jjt)i^k*zn °^ n elements of the interval (1, m) of N,

0T« ® • ■ • ® &lt;)

is the element of index s in the basis of (T n (M))*, dual to the basis of T n (M)
consisting of the e s = e jx &lt;g&gt; • • • ® fy n (§ 5, no. 5, Theorem 1). Hence 8y is
bijective.

Similarly, formula (30 bis) shows that, for every finite subset H of (1, m)
with n elements, (-l) n(n ~ 1)/2 9A(«H) (notation of § 7, no. 8, Theorem 1) is the
element of index H in the basis of (A n (M))*, dual to the basis of A n (M) consis-
ting of the e B . Hence G A is bijective.

Suppose now only that M is finitely generated and projective; then M is a
direct factor of a finitely generated free A-module L, so that there exist two

591



Ill



TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS



A-linear mappings M-4-L.4*M whose composition is the identity 1 M . We
deduce a commutative diagram



T(M*)

6t



J^ T (L*) -™» T(M*)



T(M)



*gr



6t

-^TCL)*^



6t

-&gt;T(M)** r



*T(;) N ' n(p)

and an analogous commutative diagram where T is replaced by A. The
proposition then follows from the following lemma:

Lemma 2. Let

X -^ Y -^-&gt;X



/
X'



■&gt; Y'



/
-*X'



be a commutative diagram of sets and mappings such that v © u and v' ° u' are the
identity mappings of X and X' respectively. Then, if g is infective (resp. surjective,
resp. bijective), so isf

u is injective since v ° u is, hence, if g is injective, u' °f = g o u is injective
and therefore fis injective. Similarly v' is surjective since v' o u' is; hence, if
g is surjective,/© v = v' ° g is surjective and therefore/ is surjective.

The last assertion of Proposition 7 follows from the fact that A(M) is then
a finitely generated A-module (§ 7, no. 3, Proposition 6 and II, § 11, no. 6,
Remark).

We now examine what can be said concerning the homomorphism 0s when
M is projective and finitely generated. Suppose first that M admits a finite basis
( e i)i&lt;i&lt;m- I n ^e notation at the beginning of the chapter the A-module
S n (M) admits as basis the family of elements e a such that |a| = n. Let u a
(for ja| = n) denote the element of index a in the basis of (S n (M))* dual to
(e a ). The elements w a , for a e N m , therefore form a basis of the algebra S(M)* gr
and we shall obtain the multiplication table of this basis explicitly. We write

Then by definition

tfctHY = &lt;"a"0&gt; &lt;w&gt; = «*((«&lt;* ® %)( C (* V )))&gt;

where m: A ® A -&gt; A defines the multiplication on A and c is the coproduct
of S(M). In other words, a aBY is just the coefficient of e a (g&gt; e &amp; when c(e y ) is



592



THE GRADED DUALS T(M)** r , S(M)* Kr AND A (M)* 8r § 1 1.5

written in terms of the basis of S(M) (g) S(M) consisting of the e^ (g) e\ where
£ and 7) run through N m . But since c is an algebra homomorphism,

m m

c(e*) = I! (c(e t )yi = I~I («, &lt;g&gt; 1 + 1 ® e t yt

i — l t = 1

by formula (4) of no. 1 ; this gives

(31) c{S) = 5+ 2 7 (S,73)^(g&gt;^
where we write

n

(32) ((^7]))=n ( ^ + 71 , t)! (cf. § 10, no. 4, formula (18)).

Hence we obtain the multiplication table

(33) tt a K B = ((a, p)X +B .

On the other hand, if (ef) 1&lt;l&lt;m is the basis of M*, dual to (*,), it follows from
formula (29 bis) that, for all a e N m ,

(34) 6 s (e* a ) = a!« a

in the notation of § 6, no. 6. Hence the homomorphism 6 S is bijective if and
only if the a !w a form a basis of S(M) * gr , or also if the elements a ! 1 are invertible.

Proposition 8. Suppose that the ring A is an algebra over the field Q, of rational
numbers; then, for every finitely generated projective A-module M, the homomorphism

0s:S(M*)-^S(M)** r
is bijective.

It amounts to proving this when M is finitely generated and free; we pass
from this to the general case using Lemma 2 as in the proof of Proposition 7.

Remark. Let M be an A-module and p : A — &gt; B a commutative ring homomorph-
ism. Then there is a commutative diagram of graded B-algebra homomorph-
isms

T((M*) (B) ) — &gt; (T(M)**%)



T(o M )



"T(M)



T((M (B) )*) -j-* T(M (B) )**'

where the first row is a homomorphism composed of the homomorphism
6t ® 1 B :T(M*) &lt;8&gt;a B -&gt; T(M)* gr and the canonical isomorphism

T((M*) (B) )^T(M*)&lt;g&gt; A B

593



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(§ 5, no. 3, Proposition 5) . It is immediately verified, using formula (28) and
the definition of the homomorphism u E (II, § 5, no. 4), that this diagram is
commutative. When M is a. finitely generated projective A-module, M (B) is a finitely
generated projective B-module (II, § 5, no. 1, Corollary to Proposition 4)
and all the homomorphisms of the above diagram are bijective (Proposition 7
and II, § 5, no. 4, Proposition 8), There are analogous commutative diagrams
with T replaced by S or A; the diagram for A also consists of bijective
homomorphisms when M is projective and finitely generated (Proposition 7) ;
if further A is an algebra over Q,, the diagram for S also consists of bijective
homomorphisms (Proposition 8).

6. INNER PRODUCTS: CASE OF ALGEBRAS

Let E = © E p be a graded A-algebra of type N and P a graded A-module

of type Z; for every homogeneous element x e E p , left multiplication by x is an
A-linear mapping e(x) of E into itself which is graded of degree p. For every ele-
ment u eHomgr A (E, P), the right inner product of u by x, denoted by u i_ x,
is the element uo e(x) of Homgr A (E, P). We also write (i(x))(u) = u i_ x and
we see that i(x) is a graded endomorphism of degree/* of the graded A-module

Homgr A (E, P). If now x = 2* x p is an arbitrary element of E (with x p e E p
for all p ^ 0, x p = except for a finite number of values of /»), we write

00

i(x) = 2-, i(x p ), which is therefore an endomorphism of the A-module
Homgr^E,P).

To remember which element, in the expression u i_ x, "operates" on
the other, observe that the element x which "operates" on u is placed at
the free end of the horizontal line in i_.

The associativity of the algebra E goes over to the relation e(xy) = e(x) o e(y)
for x, y homogeneous; whence, by definition of i(x),

(35) i(xy) = i(y) oi( x )

first for x, y homogeneous and then, by linearity, for arbitrary x,y in E; this
may also be written

(36) (u i_ x) l y = u l (xy)

for x, y in E and u e Homgr A (E, P) ; as on the other hand clearly i (1) is the
identity mapping (since this follows from *(1) = 1 E ) and x i-&gt; i(x) is A-linear,
it is seen that the external law of composition (x, u) •-&gt; u l x (x e E,
u e Homgr A (E, P)) defines, with addition, a right E-module structure on
Homgr A (E, P).

594



INNER PRODUCTS : CASE OF ALGEBRAS §11-6

In particular we consider the case P = A, Homgr A (E, P) being in this
case the graded dual E* Br of E; i (x) is then the graded transpose of the A-linear
mapping e(x) (II, §11, no. 6), in other words, for all x, y in E, u e E* gr ,

(37) &lt;i*i_*,y&gt; = &lt;«,*y&gt;.

With the convention at the beginning of the paragraph, note that, if x e E p ,
i(x) is an endomorphism of E* gr of degree —p.

For every homogeneous element x e E p , right multiplication by x is simi-
larly denoted by e'(x) and the element u o e'(x) of Homgr A (E, P), called the
left inner product ofu by x, by x _i a; we write i'(x) = x j u and i'(x) is therefore
a graded endomorphism of Homgr A (E, P) of degree p; as above this definition
can be extended to the case where x is an arbitrary element of E. As in this
case e'{xy) = e'(y)e'(x),

(38) i'(xy) =j'(*) o,"(y)
which may also be written

(39) *j(yja) = (xy) j u

and shows that the external law of composition (x,a)^xj« defines, with
addition, a left E-module structure on Homgr A (E, P). The associativity of E
implies on the other hand that e(x) ° e'(y) = e'(y) ° e{x) for #, y homogeneous
in E, whence the relation

(40) {y ju)\- x = y Ji {u\- x)

so that the two external laws of composition on Homgr A (E, P) define on
this set an (E, E)-bimodule structure (II, § 1, no. 14).

When we take P = A, i'(x) is the graded transpose of e'(x) ; in other words,
for all x, y in E, u e E* Br ,

(41) &lt;y, nn) = iyx, u).

When the graded algebra E is commutative, obviously u i. x = x j u. When
E is anticommutative and P = A, then for x e E p , y eE r and u e E*,
yx = ( — \) pr xy, whence, by (37) and (41), &lt;ML_x,y&gt;= ( — l) pr (y, x j u).
But as the two sides of this relation are zero except for r = q — p,

X J U = (-1) P(8_P) ML X.

Let F be another graded A-algebra and &lt;|&gt; : E -&gt; F an A-homomorphism of
graded algebras; then $ = Hom(&lt;j&gt;, 1 P ) : Homgr A (F, P) -&gt; Homgr A (E, P) is a
graded A-homomorphism of degree 0; by definition, for x, y in E and
ueHomgr A (F,P)

(J(«l«K*)))CsO«(«l *(*))(*&amp;))

= «(&lt;K*)&lt;Ky)) = "($(*#)) = ($(")) (xy) = ($(«) l x)(y)

595



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

or also

(42) {(if i_ &lt;j&gt;(x)) = $(«) l x
and similarly

(43) $($(*) j a) = x J $(11).

In other words, when Homgr A (F, P) is considered as an (E, E)-bimodule by-
means of the ring homomorphism &lt;j&gt; : E -&gt; F, it is seen that &lt;j&gt; is an (E, E)-
bimodule homomorphism (or also an E-homomorphism of the (F, F)-bimodule
Homgr A (F, P) into the (E, E)-bimodule Homgr A (E, P)).

Examples. In particular the above may be applied when E is one of the graded
algebras T(M), S(M) or A(M) for an A-module M and P an A-module (with
the trivial graduation). To find explicitly the bimodule structures thus ob-
tained, note that the elements of degree — a of Homgr A (T(M), P) (resp.
Homgr A (S(M), P), resp. Homgr A (/\(M), P)) are identified with the n-linear
mappings (resp. symmetric n-linear mappings, resp. alternating n-linear mappings)
of M n into P. It suffices to express the products

/l. (*! (g)x 2 ®- • -® x P )

(resp./L (tf!*2- • •**), resp./L (x x A x 2 A • • • A x p )) for every finite sequence
( x i)ki&lt;p °f elements of M and the analogues for the left inner product. It
follows immediately from the definitions that

(44) /i_ (* x ® x 2 (g&gt;- • • &lt;g&gt; x p ) = (x x &lt;g) x 2 (g&gt;- • • &lt;g) x p ) j/=
ifp&gt;n and that, forjb &lt; «,/l (x x ® x 2 &lt;g&gt; • • • ® x p ) (resp.

(*i ® * a ® ■ • • ® x p ) j/)
is the (a — p) -linear mapping defined by

I(/l (x x ® x 2 &lt;g&gt; • • • ® *,)) (y a , ...,y n - P )
— f \ x l&gt; • • •» x p&gt;!/l&gt; • • 'iVn-p)
((*! ® x 2 ® • • • &lt;g&gt; x p ) j/)(yi, . . .,y„_ p )
= f{yii • • -&gt;yn-v&gt; x i&gt; • • •&gt; x p)-

For /&gt; &gt; a, there are also in Homgr A (S(M), P) (resp. Homgr A (A(M), P))
formulae (44) with x x &lt;g&gt; x 2 ® • • • ® x p replaced by x x x 2 . . . x p (resp.
x x A x 2 A • • • A x p ). For p ^ n, the same substitutions in (45) define the
symmetric (n — p) -linear mappings fi. (x x x 2 . . .x p ) and {x 1 x 2 . . .x p ) _i/(resp. the
alternating (a — p) -linear mappings

f\- (x x A x 2 A • • • A x p ) and (x x A x 2 A • • • A x p ) j/).
596



INNER PRODUCTS : CASE OF COGEBRAS §11.7

When n = p, the above products are equal to the constant function on M equal
to/(*i,...,* p ).

If u: M-&gt;N is an A-module homomorphism, T(«) : T(M) -&gt; T(N) is a
graded A-algebra homomorphism, then it follows from what we have seen
above that (T(w))~ is a T(M) -homomorphism of the (T(N), T(N))-bimodule
Homgr A (T(N), P) into the (T(M), T(M))-bimodule Homgr A (T(M), P), relative
to the ring homomorphism T(u). There are analogous results for (S(«)) ~ and
(A(«))~.

7. INNER PRODUCTS: CASE OF COGEBRAS

Let E = (37 E_ be a coassociative counital graded coeebra. Then we know (no. 2,
p&gt;0 ° * *

Propositions 1 and 3) that the graded dual E* gr has (with the convention on

graduations made at the beginning of the paragraph) a graded algebra structure

of type N over A, the product of two elements u, v of this algebra being defined

by uv = m° (u&lt;g&gt;v) oc, where c: E -&gt; E ® A E is the coproduct and

m:A® A A-^A defines the multiplication. In other words, if, for xeE,

c(x) = 2-,y i &lt;g&gt; Zj, we can write (canonically identifying A ® A E and E)

&lt;*, uv) = (uv)(x) = Z, «(y,)»(z,) = »(z, «(y f )z,)

= o(((a ® 1 E ) ° c)(*)) = &lt;((u &lt;g&gt; 1 E ) o c)(x), »&gt;.

This can be interpreted by saying that, for all u homogeneous of degree p in
E* gr , the left multiplication e{u) : v ■-&gt; uv in E* gr is the graded transpose of the
graded endomorphism of degree — /&gt;

(46) j (a) = (a ® 1 B ) oc
of E; hence, in the above notation,

(*(»))(*) =^«(y0^-

Formula (46) also defines an element i{u) eEndgr A (E) for every element
u e E* gr ; for all x e E and all u e E* gr , we write

(47) *l«= (*'(«))(*)
so that, for u and v in E* gr ,

&lt;#, m»&gt; = &lt;# l u, »&gt;.
The element x i_ m of E is called the rigfa inner product ofx by u.

597



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Here again the element u which "operates" on x is placed at the free end
of the horizontal line in i_ .

For any two elements u, v of E* gr ,

(48) x i_ (uv) = (x l u) l v,

in other words

i(uv) = i(v) o i(u).

As above let c(x) = 2 y K ® z u so that x l (uv) = 2, (no)^)^. If

Kyi) = ^y'n®y"h

then

(49) x i_ (uv) = 2 utfMyttZi.

On the other hand, if c(z ( ) = 2-, z' ik ® zf fc , then

(50) («La)L» = 2 u(yi)v(zl k )Zi k .

Now, the coassociativity of E shows that (no. 2, Proposition 1)

(51) 2 y'a &lt;g&gt; y" y ® z t = 2 y t ® z'm (8) 2i" fc

and the equality of expressions (49) and (50) follows from the fact that they
are respectively the image of the left and right hand sides of (51) under the
linear mapping/from E &lt;g) E &lt;g&gt; E to E such that/(x ® y &lt;g&gt; z) = u(x)v(y)z.
We recall on the other hand (no. 2, Proposition 3) that the unit element of
the algebra E* gr is the linear form e: x i-&gt; y(x) . 1 ; hence

xi_* = 2,Y(yi)*t = *

by virtue of the definition of counit. As the mapping u^-i (u) is linear, it is
seen that the external law of composition (u, x) i-&gt; x i_ u defines a right E* gr -
module structure on E.

Similarly we define, for all u e E* gr , the endomorphism of E

(52) i'(u) = (lv®u)°c
and, for all x e E, we write

(53) (»'(«))(*) =iij*

and this element of E is called the left inner product of x by u. As above it is seen

598



INNER PRODUCTS: CASE OF COGEBRAS § 1 1.7

that the external law (u, v) &gt;-»• u j x defines a left E* er -module structure on E.
Moreover, these two structures are compatible, in other words,

(54) (w _i #) l z&gt; = a j (# i_ 0)

for u, v in E* gr (II, § 1, no. 14). With the same notation as above, the left hand

side of (54) is 2* u(z i )v(y' u )y" J and the right hand side is 2« v(y t )u(Zi te )z' ik ; their

equality follows from the fact that they are the respective images of the left and
right hand sides of (51) under the linear mapping g of E (g) E ® E into E such
that g(x ® y (g) z) = v{x)u{z)y.

It is therefore seen that the two external laws of composition on E defines on
this set an (E* gr , E* er )-bimodule structure.

When the cogebra E is cocommutative, then u j x — x l u for all x e E and
u e E* gr ; when it is anticocommutative (§ 4, no. 9) and aeE* and x e E a , we

can write c{x) = zi, \2* y i} ® £&lt;, g -J withy y and z u in E y for all j and then
by hypothesis

2 ztj ®yt, q -i = (-l)' ( «-»2y„ z itq _ } .
By definition, x l u = 2^ [2L, u(yij) z i,&lt;i-j) and

As u{yij) = (resp. u(z Uq _ :f ) = unless,/ = p (resp. q — j = p), it is seen by
the above that u _i x = ( — l) p(a-p) # i_ a.

Finally, let &lt;j&gt;: E-&gt;F be a graded cogebra morphism; then it has been seen
(no. 2) that the graded transpose *&lt;]&gt;: F* gr -&gt; E* gr is a graded algebra homomor-
phism; therefore, for x e E, u, v in F* gr ,

&lt;ej&gt;(* U '$(«)), *&gt; = &lt;* L. '*(«)» '*(»)&gt; = &lt;*&gt; W«W*)&gt; = &lt;*, W«0&gt;
= &lt;&lt;!&gt;(*), uv &gt; = &lt;&lt;K*) L- ", V}
whence

(55) &lt;[&gt;(*) L u — &lt;K* L f&lt; K")) ;

and similarly

(56) u j (j&gt;(*) = &lt;K'&lt;K«) -J *).

In other words, &lt;{&gt; is an F* er -homomorphism of the (E* gr , E* gr )-bimodule E into
the (F* gr , F* gr )-bimodule F, relative to the ring homomorphism

^:F* Br -&gt;E* gr .

599



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Examples. In particular the above can be applied when E is one of the graded
cogebras T(M), S(M) or A(M) for an A-module M (no. 1, Examples 5, 6 and 7).
To find explicitly the bimodule structures thus obtained, we again identify a
homogeneous element/ of degree n in T(M)** r (resp. S(M)* gr , resp. A(M)* Br )
with an n-linear form (resp. symmetric n-linearform, resp. alternating n-linear form,
also called an n-form) on M n . It suffices to express the products

(*i &lt;g&gt; * 2 &lt;8&gt; • • • ® Xp) i- /(resp. (x x x 2 . . .x p ) l/,

resp. (*x A # a A • • • A x p ) i_/) for every finite sequence (# ( ) 1&lt;1&lt;p of elements
of M and the analogues for the left inner product. Now, definitions (46) and
(52) and formulae (3), (6) and (9) of no. 1 give respectively:

f(*i &lt;S&gt; *2 &lt;S&gt; • • • ® x p ) l./ = /-» (*i ® *2 ® • • • ® *») =

(57) -i (* x x a . • •*„) u/ = /j (*!* a . • •**) =0 for /&gt; &lt; n.
t (* x A * 2 A • • • A x p ) i_/ = / J (*i A x 2 A • • • A x p ) =

For p ^ n, we have respectively

(58) fo ® * a ® • • • ® * p ) i~f=f(x l3 . . ., * n )*n + i ® ■ • • ® *,

(59) (x^ . . . * p ) U / = 2, /(x a(1) , • • • J *a(n)K(n + 1) •



^alp)



(60) (Xj. A # 2 A • • • A * p ) \-f = 2, « /(*o(l)» • • -J *o(n))*a(n + l) A • • • A X a(p)

(where, in (59) and (60), the summations are taken over the permutations
a e @p which are increasing on each of the intervals (1 , n) and (n + 1, j&amp;) of N) ; and
similarly

(61) /_l (*x ® * a ® ■ " ' ® *p) = /(*j»-n + l&gt; • • •» *p)*l ® *2 ® • • • ® * P -n

(62) /j (^i^2 • • -Xp) = ^_//(AT a(p _ n + 1) , . . ., X a (pV x o(l)' • • x a(p-n)

(63) / J (#! A #2 A • • • A x p ) =

£~&gt; s a/(*a(p-n + l)&gt; • • •&gt; #a(p))*o(l) A • • • A X a(p _ n)
a

(where, in (62) and (63), the summations are taken over the permutations
treSj which are increasing on each of the intervals {\,p — n) and (/&gt; — n + 1, j&amp;) of
N).

8. INNER PRODUCTS: CASE OF BIGEBRAS

Let E be a graded bigebra (resp. skew graded bigebra) (no. 4, Definition 3) ;
then the results of nos. 6 and 7 can be applied to define the right (resp. left)
inner products x l. w e E and « i_ x e E* er (resp. kjxgE and x j m e E* Kr )

600



INNER PRODUCTS: CASE OF BIGEBRAS § 1 1.8

for all xeE and all u e E* gr . Thus an (E, E)-bimodule structure and an
(E* Kr , E* Br )-bimodule structure are obtained on E. Further:

Proposition 9. Let E be a graded bigebra (resp. skew graded bigebra). For every
element x of degree 1 in E, the left and right inner products by x are derivations (resp.
antiderivations) (§ 10, no. 2) of the algebra E** 1 ".

In the notation of no. 6, for every homogeneous element x of degree 1 in a
graded bigebra (resp. a skew graded bigebra) E,

c(x) =#&lt;g)l + l®#,

by Proposition 5 of no. 3 and the fact that c is a homomorphism of degree 0.
Suppose first that E is a graded bigebra. For all y e E, by definition

&lt;(uv) l x,y&gt; = (uv,xy)&gt; = m((u ® v)(c(xy)))

and since c is an algebra homomorphism, c(xy) = c(x)c(y). Let c{y) — Z* s t ® /,
with Si and t t in E; therefore

c{xy) — 2-, (xsi) (g) t t + 2-, Si (g) (xt t ).
Hence &lt;(«») \- x,y} = Z, u(xs t )v(t t ) + Z, u{s^v(xt^. But we may write

Z, u{xsi)v{ti) = m({(u l *) ® v)(c(y))) = &lt;(« l x)v,y&gt;
and similarly

2 u(Si)v(xti) = m((« (o l x))(c(y))) = &lt;u{v i_ *),y&gt;,
whence, returning to the notation i (*) for the inner product.

(64) (• (*))(«*) = ((»(*))(»))» + «((«(*))(*))

which proves that i(#) is a derivation in E* Kr .

Suppose now that E is a j^w graded bigebra, that mgE*, oeE* and
y e E r ; then we can write

where the s tj and J w belong to E, ; by definition of the product in E e ® A E, then



(xy) = c{x)c{y) = 2 &lt;r (2 (*%) ® * t , r _ y + (-l)'Z, J tf ® (xtt.r-j))
Lee this time

&lt;(«») i.x,yy = o Z &lt;r (2w(*%)z&gt;(* f , r -y) + (-iy 2, «(%)»(**,,,..,)).



c
whence this time



601



HI TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Then also 2, (2, fi(;w tf )»(* l&gt;r _,)J = &lt;(« i_ *)o,y&gt;. On the other hand,
«(j w ) = unless j = —p and hence we may also write

2 (-l)'(2«(%&gt;Kr-y)) = (-l)'&lt;«(»L*),y&gt;.
We therefore conclude that

(65) («(*))(«0 = ((«(*))(«))* + (-i)M(»(*))W).

in other words 2 (at) is an antiderivation in E* sr . The assertions relating to the left
inner product by an element x of degree 1 in E are proved similarly.

Remarks. (1) Let E be a graded bigebra over A and N, N', N" three graded
A-modules. Let m be an A-bilinear mapping of N x N' into N"; for u e
Homgr A (E, N) and v e Homgr A (E, N'), let u.v denote the graded homo-
morphism m o (u v) o c of E into N". On the other hand, let i (x) denote the
(right or left) inner product by xeE in the A-modules Homgr A (E, N),
Homgr A (E, N') and Homgr A (E, N"). Then, if x is of degree 1,

(i{x)){u.v) = ((*»)("))•* + «.((•(*))(*))
for all u e Homgr A (E, N) and v e Homgr A (E, N').

Under the same conditions, if E is a skew graded bigebra and u is homo-
geneous of degree p, then

(i(x))(u.v) = ((i(x))(u)).v + (-l)*.((f (*))(*)).

The proofs are the same as in Proposition 9.

(2) The same argument as in the above proof proves, more generally, that

for all x e E, if c(x) = 2 x' } x", then, for all u, v in E* gr , the "Leibniz
formula"

(«»)(!») =^(*(fj))(«). («(*?))(»)

holds. In particular, for every primitive element of a graded bigebra E, that is
such that c(x) = x 1 + 1 x, i (x) is a derivation of E* gr .

Proposition 10. Let E be a graded bigebra (resp. skew graded bigebra). For every
element f of degree 1 in E* gr , the left and right inner products are derivations (resp.
antiderivations) of the algebra E.

Let x e E p , y e E p (p ^ 1, q ^ 1). By Proposition 5 of no. 3, we can write

C(x) = X 1 + 2, (2, *fy tf/.p-y) + 1 *

c(y) =y 1 + ^2,^(2,^, ®yf.«- fc ) + 1 ®y
602



INNER PRODUCTS § 11.9

where x' i} and x") belong to E j} y' ik and y" i}c to E fc . If £ is a graded bigebra, the
component of c(xy) = c{x)c(y) belonging to E x ® E, is equal to

2, &lt;! &lt;g) &lt; p _!y + 2,y { ',i (8) xy".*-\
and hence by definition

(xy) l/= Z/«i)&lt; p _iy + 2,/(yi / .i)«yr.«-i
= (* &gt;-/)y + *(y l/)

and the right inner product by /is a derivation. If on the other hand E is a skew
graded bigebra, the component of c(xy) belonging to E x ® E is equal to

2&lt; x ®&lt;p-xy + (-l^Z,^,! &lt;g&gt;*yf,„-i

and this time we obtain

(xy) uf= (xi-f)y + (~l) p x(y i_/)

which shows that i(f) is then an antiderivation. The argument is similar for the
left inner product by/.

Examples. Propositions 9 and 10 apply in particular to the graded bigebra
S(M) and the skew graded bigebra A(M). The inner products by elements of
degree 1 in S(M) (resp. S(M)* gr ) are derivations which commute with one another,
since S(M) (resp. S(M)* gr ) is commutative.

Similarly, the inner products by elements of degree 1 in A(M) (resp.
A(M)* Br ) are antiderivations, which are of zero square, for the square of an
element of degree 1 in the algebra A (M) (resp. A(M)* gr ) is zero.

9. INNER PRODUCTS BETWEEN T(M) AND T(M*) } S(M) AND S(M*), A(M)
AND A(M*)

The right inner product defines on T(M) (resp. S(M), resp. A(M)) a right
module structure over the algebra T(M)* Br (resp. S(M)* gr , resp. A(M)* Kr )
(no. 7, Examples). Using the canonical homomorphisms 0t (resp. 6s, resp. G A )
of no. 5, we derive

a right T(M*)-module structure on T(M)
a right S(M*)-module structure on S(M)

a left A (M*) -module structure on A(M).

The external law of any of these structures is also denoted by

(z*,t) ^i(z*).t

603



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(by an abuse of language) ; we also write t l z* instead oft (z*) . t in the case of
T(M) or S(M) ; on the other hand, we write z* j tin the case of A (M) and say
that this is a left inner product of / by z*, since then we have a left A(M*)-
module law. For z* homogeneous of degree n and t homogeneous of degree p,
i(z*).t = if p &lt; n and, for x t e M (1 ^ i ^ p), xf e M* (1 ^ j ^ n) and
p ^ n, by virtue of formulae (58), (59) and (60) of no. 7,

(66) i (xf x$ ® • • • &lt;g&gt; x*) . (x x x 2 &lt;g&gt; • • • ® x p )

= \)_| &lt;**, X y &gt; jx n + j &lt;g&gt; • • • &lt;g&gt; X p

(67) i (*?*f . . . x*) . (x x x 2 . . . x p ) = Z ( n &lt;xf , x a(y) &gt;]x CT(n + d . . . x a(p)

(68) i (** A ** A • • • A *jf) . (*i A # 2 A • • • A # p )

= (-l)^ n - 1)/a 2^(n&lt;*f,^o)&gt;)*oo. + i) A ..-A x (



V CT(P)



where, the formulae (67) and (68), a runs through the set of permutations
a £ P which are increasing on the intervals (1, n) and (w + l,p).
We can also write, in the inner product notation,

&lt;* i_ u*, v*} = it, Q T (u*v*)&gt; for t e T(M), u*, v* in T(M*)

&lt;t l «*, o*&gt; = &lt;t, 0s («*»*)&gt; for * e S(M), «*, v* in S(M*)

&lt;y*,M* j*&gt; = &lt;0 A (w* A v*),t&gt; for te A(M), «*, »* in A(M*).

We leave to the reader the task of finding explicitly the analogous formulae
for left inner products, this time using formulae (61), (62) and (63).

The above can be applied with M replaced by its dual M* ; M* must then
be replaced by the bidual M** and T(M*), for example, thus has a right
module structure over the algebra T(M**). But the canonical mapping
c M :M -&gt; M** defines an algebra homomorphism T(c M ) :T(M) — *- T(M**), by
means of which T(M*) has a right T(M)-module structure. Similarly S(M*)
(resp. A(M*)) has a right S(M)-module (resp. left A (M) -module) structure. The
explicit formulae giving the external laws of these modules are derived im-
mediately from the above by exchanging the roles of M and M*. Note that, for
all xeM, i(x) is always a derivation (resp. antiderivation of zero square) of the
graded algebra S(M*) (resp. A(M*)).

Proposition 11. The canonical homomorphism 0t:T(M*) -&gt;T(M)* gr (resp.
s :S(M)-&gt;S(M)* gr , resp. A :A(M*) -&gt; A(M)** r ) is a right T '(M) -module
(resp. right S(M)-module, resp. left A(M) -module) homomorphism.

604



INNER PRODUCTS IN FINITELY GENERATED FREE MODULE § 1 1.10

We show first that, for z* e T(M*) and / e T(M),

(69) T (z* l/) = t (z*) i_ t.

Since M is a generating system of the algebra T(M), we need only prove (69)
when t = xeM; moreover we can restrict our attention to the case where
z* = *? ® x% &lt;g) • • • &lt;g) **, where the xf e M*, and then, by (66) with the
roles of M and M* interchanged, z* l. x = &lt;#, x* }x* ® • • • ® x*. Therefore,
for all y 2 , . . . , y p in M,

p
&lt;0t(z* i_ x),y 2 &lt;g&gt; y 3 ® . . • &lt;g)y p &gt; = &lt;*, *?&gt; I"I &lt;y„ **&gt;

= &lt;0 T (z*),^®y 2 ®-.-®y p &gt;

= &lt;0 t (z*)l.*,# 2 ®---®y p &gt;

whence (69).

We prove secondly that for z* £ S(M*) and t e S(M),

(70) 0s(z* l/) = s (z*) l t.

As above, we can limit ourselves to the case t = x g M. But further, here i (x) is
a derivation of S(M*) and a derivation of S(M) * er . Therefore (§ 10, no. 7, Corollary
to Proposition 9) it suffices to verify (70) for z* = #* e M*, since M* is a
generating system of S(M*) ; but this is trivial, the two sides then being equal
to &lt;#*, #&gt;. A similar argument proves the relation

(7i) e A (*jz*) = *j0 a (z*)

for z*eA(M*) and /eA(M): observe then that, for *eM, i(x) is an
antiderivation in A(M*) as well as in A(M)* Br and use § 10, no. 7, Corollary to
Proposition 9. There is an analogous result for left inner products.

10. EXPLICIT FORM OF INNER PRODUCTS IN THE CASE OF A FINITELY
GENERATED FREE MODULE

Let M be a finitely generated free A-module, (e t ) 1&lt;i&lt;n a basis of M and
{ e f)i&lt;t&lt;n tne dual basis of M*. For every finite sequence s = (i 1} . . ., i p ) of
elements of (1, n), let e 8 = e h ® e i2 ® . • • &lt;g&gt; e ip (resp. ef = ef x &lt;g) • • • ® ef p ). We
know (§ 5, no. 5, Theorem 1) that the e s form a basis of the A-module T(M)
and the ef a basis of the A-module T(M*). If s, t are two finite sequences of
elements of (1, n), let s.t denote the sequence obtained as follows: if
s = (t,, . . ., i p ) and t = (J lt . . .J q ), s.t is the sequence (i 1} . . ., i p , j X) . . .,j q )
with p + q terms. Then e s4 = e s ® e t . It then follows from (66) that

Ce s l. ef = if 5 is not of the form t.u

U.u l. ef = e u .

605



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

Similarly, the symmetric algebra S(M) has as basis the set of monomials
e* with a e N n (§ 6, no. 6, Theorem 1) and S(M*) the set of monomials e* K with
a eN n ; recall (no. 5) that u a , for Ja| = k, denotes the element of the basis of
(S fc (M))*, dual to the basis (* a ), al=fc of S fc (M); the w a , for aeN™, therefore
form a basis of S(M)* gr . The definition of right inner product by e &amp; in S(M)* Br
as the transpose of multiplication by e B in S(M) then shows that

rq,i_«»» = o if a^p

\u a L- e* = « a _ B if a &gt; p.

Similarly, since S(M) is here canonically identified with the graded dual of
S(M)* gr , i(u &amp; ) is the graded transpose of multiplication by u &amp; in S(M)** r and
hence from the multiplication table (33) (no. 5) of the basis (w a ) we deduce
that

(V u % = if a £ (5

^ ' V «- "u = (P» a ~ P)*""" if a &gt; P-

As for the right inner product of an element of S(M) by an element of S(M*),
the definition of this product (no. 9) and formula (34) of no. 5 allow us to
deduce from (74) the formulae

|V l. ** e = if a £ P

(75) r L '* = (^^ &lt;?a ~ B if a ^ p -

There are analogous formulae for the inner product of an element of S(M*) by
an element of S(M) interchanging the roles of M and M* (since M** is here
identified with M).

Remark. Being given the basis fo)i«i«n allows us to identify the algebra S(M)
with the polynomial algebra AfX^ ..., X n ] (§ 6, no. 6); formula (75)
shows that the inner product by e* a is just the differential operator
D a = D^D£ 2 . . .D£ n , where D, = d/eX* for 1 &lt; i ^ n (§ 10, no. 1 1, Example).

Consider finally the exterior algebra A(M), which has as basis the set of
elements e J} where J runs through the set of subsets of the interval (1, n) of N

(§ 7, no. 8, Theorem 1) ; similarly A(M*) has as basis the elements e*. It fol-
lows from formula (68) of no. 9 that

(et J e 3 = if K £ J

(76) UI-1^=(-1) p(p - 1)/2 Pk. J -k^-k if Kcj and p = Card(K),

where p K , j-k is tne number defined by formula (19) of § 7, no. 8. There are
analogous formulae with the roles of M and M* interchanged.

606



ISOMORPHISMS §11.11

11. ISOMORPHISMS BETWEEN A P (M) AND A n ~ p (M*) FOR AN n-DIMEN-
SIONAL FREE MODULE M

Proposition 12. Let M be a free A-module of dimension n; let ee/\ n (M.) be an
element forming a basis of A n (M) and let e* be the element of A n (M*) such that
{( _ i)n ( n-i)/ 20A ( e *)} ^ the dml basis of {e} in (A n (M))*. Let &lt;{&gt;: A(M*) -&gt; A(M)
fo £fo mapping z«- z j«* anrf &lt;J&gt;': A(M*) -&gt; A(M) tf/ie mapping z* »-&gt; z* j «.
Z&gt;f &lt;j&gt; p (resp. &lt;J&gt; P ) fo ^ restriction of§ (resp. (j)') to A P (M) (resp. A P (M*)). Then:
(i) The mapping &lt;j&gt; w a /«/£ A(M) -module isomorphism and the mapping §' is a left

A(M*) -module isomorphism; moreover the mappings § and §' are inverses of one
another.

(ii) The mapping &lt;j&gt; p is an isomorphism of the A-module A P (M) onto the A-module
A" P (M*) and the mapping &lt;J&gt; P is an isomorphism of the A-module A P (M*) onto the
A-module A n_P (M).

(iii) If we write B(w, v*) = (u, a (*&gt;*)&gt; / or «eA(M) and v* eA(M*) then,
foru* eA P (M*) andv* eA n_P (M*),

(77) B(&amp;(«*), »•) = (-1)*»-«B(«», &amp;_,(**)).

The fact that &lt;j&gt; is A (M) -linear and §' is A (M*) -linear follows from the
formulae (u A v) je* — u j (vj e*) and («* A v*) J e = u* j (o* j *) (no. 6,
formula (37), using the fact that 8 A is an isomorphism of A(M*) onto the

opposite algebra to A(M)*). On the other hand there exists a basis (^)i&lt;i&lt; n
of M such that



e = e x A e 2 A • • • A e n and e* = ( - l)^n-vi2 e * /^ e * A • • • A e,



where (ef) is the basis dual to (e t ). We write I = (1, «); it follows from (76)
that, for every subset J of I with p elements,



(78)






wo = (-i) n(n - i)/2+p(p - l)/2 pj,i-^f j
(«?) = (-i) p(p - i)/2 pj.i-^i-j.



This proves that &lt;|&gt; and &lt;|&gt;' are bijective; moreover Pj,i-jPi-j,j = ( — l) p(n p)
(§ 7, no. 8, formula (21)) ; as the number

n±^l) + P(P^}) + (n-p)(n-p-l) + ^ _^ _ ^ _ 1}

is «#ra, it follows that &lt;j&gt; and ({&gt;' are inverses of one another. Finally, to prove (77),
it suffices to take u* = e* and v* = ej-Lj; the verification also follows from the
definition of 6 A , formulae (78) and the relation Pj,i_jPi-j,j = ( — l) p(n ~ p)
(§ 7, no. 8, formula (21)). Note that, for u* e A P (M*) and v* e A n_P (M*),

607



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

B(&lt;j&gt;p(«*), v*) is, to within a sign, the coefficient of u* A v* with respect to the
basis {«*} of A n (M*).

Proposition 13. With the hypotheses and notation of Proposition 11, for every endo-
morphism g of the A-module M.

(79). (det 5 H = A(^)o ( j&gt;oA^).

Clearly A (*g) = A X o (*A(g)) o A ; since A (g) is an endomorphism of the
algebra A(M) and by definition, for all

z G A(M), B A {A(g)(z) J e*) = A (**) l. 8 A (A(*)(z)),
we deduce from formula (42) of no. 6 that

((&lt;V o («A(^)) o e A ) o &lt;j&gt; o A( g ))(z) = ex 1 ( t A( 5 )(e A (.*)) L z)

= z j (A(fc)(«*)) = (det£)(z_i**) = (detg)^(z)
taking account of § 8, no. 4, Proposition 8.
Corollary. For every automorphism gqfE,
(80) A^" 1 ) = (dets)- 1 * o (A(g)) o $-i.

12. APPLICATION TO THE SUBSPACE ASSOCIATED WITH A /--VECTOR

Let K be a field and E a vector space over K. Recall that with every /&gt;-vector

z e A (E) is associated a finite-dimensional subspace M 3 of E, namely the

smallest vector subspace M of E such that z e A P (M) (§ 7, no. 2, Corollary to
Proposition 4).

Proposition 14. (i) The orthogonal ofM 3 in E* is the set ofx*eE* such that
x* j z = 0.

(ii) The subspace M z associated with z is the image of A P_1 (E*) under the
mapping \:u*^u* j z o/A P_1 (E*) into E.

Let N denote the image of X 2 . For x* e E* and u* e A P_1 (E*),

&lt;8 A (**),«* j z&gt; = &lt;6 A (w* A x*), z&gt; = (-l)'- 1 ^** A u *) } 2 &gt;

= (- 1)*- 1 ^ («*),** J *&gt;.
Therefore, for x* to be orthogonal to N, it is necessary and sufficient that
x* j z be orthogonal to 8 A (A(E*)). Now, the latter condition is equivalent
to saying that x* j z = 0; for let (^)xeL be a basis of E; giving L a total order-
ing, it has been seen (§ 7, no. 8, Theorem 1) that the e 3 , for J running through
the set $(L) of finite subsets of L, form a basis of A(E); it then follows from

608



PURE ^-VECTORS. GRASSMANNIANS § 11.13

formula (30) of no. 5 that the elements A («J) are, to within a sign, the coordi-
nate forms on A(E) relative to the basis (ej) ; whence our assertion.

The orthogonal of N therefore consists of the x* e E* such that x*jz =
and the conclusion of (i) will therefore follow from (ii).

We show first that N &lt;= M 3 . Let M be a vector subspace of E such that
zeA(M) and letj:M-&gt;E be the canonical injection; let \x g denote the
mapping v* &gt;-&gt;»* j z of A P-1 (M*) into M; it follows from formula (60) of
no. 7 that there is a canonical factorization

Ap-i(ty)

X^A'-^E*) - &gt; A'-^M*) J^. M -U. E

which proves that NcM and hence N c M g by definition of M 2 . It remains
to verify that N = M 2 . Suppose the converse: there would then exist a basis
(*i)i&lt;i&lt;n of M 2 and an element x* e E* such that &lt;**, *i&gt; = 1, &lt;#*, e,y =
for 2 &lt; j &lt; « and such that #* is orthogonal to N and hence x* j z = 0. We

write z = 2-, %%, where the sum is taken over the subsets of (1, n) with p
elements. By (68) (no. 9),

** J e s = if 1 £ H

** -J *{1}uh = % if He (2, «)

which shows that the relation x* j z = implies c H = for 1 e H. But this
is impossible, for z would then belong to A P (M'), where M' is the subspace
of M generated by e 2 , . . . , e n .

13. PURE /^-VECTORS. GRASSMANNIANS

Let K be a field and E a vector space over K. A /&gt;-vector z e A P (E) is called
pure (or sometimes decomposable) if it is non-zero and there exist vectors x lt . . . , x p
in E such that z = x x A x 2 A • • • A x p . For this, it is necessary and sufficient
that the subspace M 2 associated with z (which is always of dimension ~^p for

z ^ 0) be exactly of dimension p (since A P (M 2 ) is then of dimension 1). In

particular, every non-zero scalar, every non-zero element of E = A (E), every

non-zero element of A n (E), when E is of dimension «, is pure.

Proposition 15. Let E be a vector space of dimension n and let e be an element #0 of

A n (E) [hence forming a basis of this vector space). Let &lt;j&gt;:A(E) -&gt; A(E*) be the
vector space isomorphism associated with e (no. 1 1, Proposition 12). If z is a pure ele-
ment of/\ P (E), then §(z) is a pure element of/\ nP (E*) and the subspaces associated
with z and 4&gt;(z) are orthogonal.

609



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

The cases p = Oand/&gt; = n are trivial. Suppose therefore that 1 &lt;/»&lt;« — 1
and let z = x x A • • • A x p # 0. Then there exists a basis (e t ) 1&lt;i&lt;n of E such
that e t = Xi for 1 &lt; i ^ p and e = e t h e 2 h • • • f\ e n . It then follows from
formula (78) of no. 11 that (|&gt;(z) = ±&lt;?*+i A • • • A e*, whence the proposition.

Corollary. I/Eis of dimension n, every non-zero (n — I) -vector E is pure.

Proposition 16. For an element z =£ qf/\ P (E) to be pure, it is necessary and sufficient
that, for all u* e A P ~\E*),

(81) (a* J z) A z = 0.

The case /» = is trivial and we assume p &gt; 1 . If z = Xj A • • • A x p ,
formula (68) (no. 9) with n = p — 1 shows that a* j z is a linear combination
of the x t (1 ^ i ^ p), whence (81). If on the other hand the subspace M g asso-
ciated with z is of dimension &gt;p, consider a basis (fy)i&lt;/&lt; n of this subspace
with n &gt; p. It follows from no. 11, Proposition 13 that each of the e f is of the
form u* j z for some u*e/\ (E*) and relation (81) therefore implies

e t f\ z = for 1 ^ j ^ n. It follows that in the expression z = 2-, a B e H (where

H runs through the set of subsets of (1, ri) with p elements) all the coefficients
a H are zero, whence z = 0, contrary to the hypothesis.

The criterion of Proposition 16 is equivalent to writing conditions (81) when
u* runs through a basis of A P (E*). In particular, suppose that E is of finite
dimension n and let (ei) 1&lt;i&lt;n be a basis of E. Conditions (81) are then equiva-
lent to the conditions

(82-(J,H)) &lt;e*,(e*jz) A z&gt; =

for all subsets J, H of (1, ri\ such that Card (J) = p + land Card (H) =p — 1.
Now, if I and I' are two subsets of (1, w) with p elements, formulae (76) of
no. 10 and multiplication table (20) of § 7, no. 8 show that

&lt;£, &lt;«£ j «i) A e r y =

unless there exists an i e (1, n) such that I — H = {i} and J — I' = {i} } in
which case

(83) &lt;£, (4 ^ e z ) A *&gt; = ( - 1)*- 1 *" »% j.h

where e f( j,H = Pw.hPto.tj it can then be said that for iej C\ C H, s J&gt;JtH is
equal to + 1 if the number of element of J which are &lt; i and the number of
elements of H which are &lt;i have the same parity, and —1 otherwise.

It follows immediately that if we write z = 2-, a^, where I runs through the
610



APPENDIX

set of subsets of (1, n) with/&gt; elements, relation (82-(J, H)) is equivalent to the
relation

(84-(J, H) ) Z s jf j, H «j-{i}«H u m = 0.

ieJ u UH

Relations (84) are called Grossman's relations; these are therefore necessary
and sufficient conditions (when J describes the set of subsets with p + 1 ele-
ments and H the set of subsets with p — 1 elements of (1, w)) for an element
z ^ of A P (E) to he pure.

Note that relations (84) are not independent. For example, for n = 4 and
p = 2, Grassmann's relations reduce to the single relation

(85) a 12 a 3i — a 13 a 2i + a^a. 23 = 0.

Let D P (E) be the subset of A P (E) consisting of the pure /^-vectors; clearly
D P (E) is saturated with respect to the equivalence relation between u and v:
"there exists X e K* such that v = Xu" and two elements u, v of D P (E) are
equivalent under this relation if and only if the subspaces M u and M v of E
which are associated with them are the same. Therefore we thus obtain a
canonical bisection of the set of p-dimensional vector subspaces of E onto the image
G P (E) o/D p (E) in the projective space P(A P (E)) associated with A P (E). The sub-
set G P (E) of P(A P (E)) is called the Grassmannian of index p of the vector space
E. When E is finite-dimensional and (&lt;? t ) i &lt; ( ^ » is a basis of E, the Grassmanian of
index p is the set of points of P(/\ P (E)) for which a system of homogeneous
coordinates (a z ) (relative to the basis (e x ) of /\ P (E)) satisfies Grassmann's
relations (84).

When E = K n , we sometimes write G np (K) instead of G p (K n ), so that
G n ,i(K) = P n _!(K). The mapping M ■-&gt; M°, which associates with every p-
dimensional subspace of K n the orthogonal subspace in E* (identified with K n
under the choice of basis dual to the canonical basis of K n ) therefore defines a
canonical bisection of G np (K) onto G nn _ p (K); Proposition 15 shows that this
bijection is the restriction to G n&gt;p (K) of a canonical isomorphism of the projective
space P(A P (K n )) onto the projective space P(A n-P (K n )).

APPENDIX

ALTERNATIVE ALGEBRAS. OCTONIONS
1. ALTERNATIVE ALGEBRAS

Let A be a commutative ring and F a (not necessarily associative) A-algebra.
For any three elements x, y, z of F, we write

(1) a{x,y, z) = x{yz) - {xy)z

611



IH TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(associator o£x, y, z); a is obviously an A-trilinear mapping of F x F x F into
F.

Lemma 1. For all p&gt; q } r, s in the algebra F,

(2) a(pq, r, s) - a(p, qr, s) + a{p, q, rs) = a(p, q, r)s + pa(q, r, s).

The verification follows immediately from definition (1).

Proposition 1. For an K-algebra F, the following conditions are equivalent:

(a) For every ordered pair of elements x,yofF, the subalgebra generated by x andy
is associative.

(b) The trilinear mapping {x,y, z) *-*■ a{x,y, z) is alternating (§ 7, no. 3).

(c) For every ordered pair of elements x,yofF, x 2 y = x{xy) andyx 2 = (yx)x.

Clearly (a) implies (c). We show that (c) implies (b): by definition (§ 7,
no. 3) to prove (b), it suffices to verify that a(x, x,y) = and a(x,y,y) = 0,
which is precisely (c).

To prove that (b) implies (a), we use the following 4 lemmas:

Lemma 2. Let E be an A-algebra suck that the trilinear mapping (x, y, z) &gt;-&gt;■ a(x, y, z)
is alternating, S a generating system ofE and U a sub-A-module ofE containing S and
such that jUcU and Us c: XJfor all seS. Then U = E.

The set U' of x e E such that xXJ c U and U* &lt;=■ U is obviously a sub-A-
module of E, which contains S by hypothesis. On the other hand, for x, y in U'
and u e U, by hypothesis

(xy)u = x(yu) + a(x,y, u) = x(yu) - a(x, u,y) = x(yu) - {xu)y + x(uy) eU;

on passing to the opposite algebra, we have similarly u(xy) e U. Hence U' is a
subalgebra of E and, since it contains S, U' = E. Hence EU c: U and a fortiori
UU &lt;z U, which proves that U is a subalgebra of E; as it contains S, U = E,
which proves the lemma.

A subset H of F is called strongly associative if a(u, v,w) =0 when at least two
of the elements u, », w belong to H.

Lemma 3. Suppose that the mapping a is alternating. If His a strongly associative subset
ofF, the subalgebra ofF generated by His strongly associative.

As the set of strongly associative subsets ofF is inductive, it suffices to prove
that if H is a maximal strongly associative subset ofF, H is then a subalgebra ofF.
As H is obviously a sub-A-module of F, it suffices to verify that for any two
elements u, v of H, H U {uv} is also strongly associative, for by virtue of the
definition of H, this will imply uv e H. Now, for all z e H and all / e F, by (2)

a(uv, t, z) — a(u, vt, z) + a(u, v, tz) =
612



APPENDIX

since H is strongly associative; as u, v, z are in H, also

a{u, vt, z) = a(u, v, tz) = 0,

whence a(uv, t, z) = 0. Using the fact that a is alternating, this shows that
a (P&gt; 9&gt; r ) = whenever at least two of the elements p, q, r belong to H u {uv}
whence the lemma.

Lemma 4. Suppose that the mapping a is alternating. Then, for all xeF, the subalgebra
o/F generated by x is strongly associative.

a(u, v, w) = whenever two of the three elements u, v, w are equal to x and
it suffices to apply Lemma 3.

Lemma 5. Suppose that the mapping a is alternating and let X, Y be two strongly
associative subalgebras o/F. Then the subalgebra ofE generated iyXuYw associative.

Let Z be the set of z e E such that a(u, v, z) — for all u e X and veY, this
is obviously a sub-A-module containing X and Y since X and Y are strongly
associative; by Lemma 2, it will suffice to verify that, for u e X and v e Y,
uL cZ,»ZcZ,ZacZ and Zv c Z. Now, for u, a'inX.oeY and z e Z, by
(2)

a(u'u, z, v) - a(u', uz, v) + a(u', u, zv) = a(u', u, z)v + u'a(u, z, v) =

by virtue of the fact that X is strongly associative and the definition of Z. But
as X is strongly associative, a(u', u, zv) = and since u'u e X, a(u'u, z, v) =
by definition of Z. Hence a{u\ uz, v) = 0, which shows that uL c Z. Applying
(2) now with (p, q, r, s) = (v, z, u, u'), we obtain similarly Zu &lt;=: Z. Inter-
changing the roles of X and Y and using the fact that a is alternating, we obtain
vZ &lt;= Z and Z»cZ; whence the lemma.

It now suffices, to prove that (b) implies (a) in Proposition 1, to take
X = {x} and Y = {y}, using Lemma 4.

Definition 1. An algebra F is called alternative if it satisfies the equivalent conditions
of Proposition 1.

An associative algebra is obviously alternative. In no. 3 we shall give an
example of an alternative algebra which is not associative.

If F is an alternative A-algebra, every A-algebra F ® A A' obtained
from F by extending the scalars (§ 1, no. 5) is an alternative A'-algebra, as
follows from condition (b) of Proposition 1.

2. ALTERNATIVE GAYLEY ALGEBRAS

Proposition 2. Let Abe a ring, F a Cayley A-algebra, e its unit element, s:xy-&gt;xits
conjugation and N:F -+ A its Cayley norm (§ 3, no. 4).

(i) For F to be alternative, it is necessary and sufficient that, for every ordered pair of
elements x,yofF, x 2 y = x{xy).

613



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(ii) IfY is alternative, then N(xy) = N(*)N(y) /or all x, y in F.

(iii) Suppose that F is alternative. For an element * e F to be invertbile, it is necessary
and sufficient that N(x) be invertible in Ae; the inverse of x is then unique and equal to
N(x) ~ 1 x; denoting this by x' 1 ,

x~ 1 (xy) = x(x~ 1 y) =y
or all y e F.

The condition x 2 y = x(xy) is obviously necessary for F to be alternative
(no. 1, Proposition 1). Conversely, if it holds for every ordered pair of elements
of F, applying it to x andy, it gives x 2 y = x(xy) ; applying the conjugation s to
this relation, we obtain yx 2 = (yx)x, so that conditions (c) of Proposition 1 of
no. 1 are satisfied.

Obviously a(e, x,y) = for all x,y in F. If F is alternative, we therefore
deduce from Proposition 1 (no. 1) that the subalgebra G of F generated by
e, x and y is associative. As x = -x + T(x) e -x + Ae, x e G and similarly
yeG. ThenN(xy) = (xy)(xy) = xy.y.x = N(y)xx = N(y)N(x), using the fact
that N(y) £ Ae. This proves (ii).

Finally we prove (iii). If N(x) is invertible in Ae and we write x' = N(x) ~ x x,
then xx' — x'x = e, for N(x) = xx = xx. Conversely if x admits a left inverse
x", then N(*")N(*) = N(«) = * by (ii) and N(x) is invertible in Ae; further, as
x' = N(x) ~ x x is in the subalgebra generated by x and e, the elements x, x', x"
belong to the associative subalgebra generated by x, x" and e and hence
x" = x"(xx') = (x"x)x' = x', whence the uniqueness assertion. The formulae
x~ x (xy) = x(x~ 1 y) = y follow from the fact that x -1 , x and y are elements of
the subalgebra generated by x, y and e, which is associative.

Proposition 3. Let E be a Cayley A-algebra, y an element of A and F the Cayley
extension ofE defined by y and the conjugation of E (§2, no. 5, Proposition 5). For
F to be alternative, it is necessary and sufficient that E be associative.

Let u = (x, y), v — (*', y') be two elements of F (where x, y, x', y' are in E).
Then (§ 2, no. 5, formula (27))

(u 2 v = ((x 2 + iyy)x' + yy'(yx + yx), (yx + yx)x' + y'(x 2 + yyy))
^ ' \u(uv) = (x(xx' + iy'y) + y{x'y + x.y')y,y{x'x + yyy') + (yx' + y'x)x).

Using the fact that yy and x + x are in Ae, examining these formulae shows
that the associativity of E implies u 2 v = u(uv) and hence the fact that F is
alternative (Proposition 2). Conversely, if F is alternative, the equation
u 2 v — u(uv) applied when y' = gives

(yx + yx)x' = y(x'x) + (yx')x.
Now the left hand side is equal to (yT(x))x' = y(x'T(x)) = y(x'x + x'x);

614



APPENDIX



comparing with the right hand side, we obtain (yx')x = y(x'x), which proves
the associativity of E, since x, y and x' are arbitrary elements of E.

3. OCTONIONS

Let E be a quaternion algebra of type (a, (3, y) over A (§ 2, no. 5, Example 2)
and let 8gA. The Cayley extension F of E by 8 and the conjugation of E is
called an octonion algebra over A and is said to be of type (a, (3, y, 8). By Propo-
sition 3 of no. 2, F is an alternative algebra. It has a basis (^) &lt;&lt;&lt;7 of 8 elements,
defined by

*o = (e, 0)&gt; e x = (i, 0), e 2 = (j, 0), e 3 = {k, 0)

*4 = (0, e), e 5 = (0, i), e 6 = (0,j), e 7 = (0, k)

where (e, i,j, k) is the basis of E defined loc. cit. ; clearly e (also denoted by e) is

7

the unit element of F. If u = 2^ ^e t is an element of F (with the £ t e A),

formulae (23), (24) and (31) of § 2, no. 5, give for the conjugate, trace and norm
of the octonion u

7

A fa



(4)



u = (S + PSi)'o

T,(«) = 2^o + P5i

N,(u) = Q + P5o5i ~ *S? ~ Y(Q + PSA



a®



- 8(Q + p?*5. - «S) + yS(^§ + P5e?7 - ««).

Now let « = (x,y), u' = (x',y') and u" = (x",y") be three octonions
(where the elements x, x\ x" i y, y\ y" belong to E). Formulae (24) and (27)
of § 2, no. 5 give

T P ((tm&gt;") = T(xx'x") + mfyx") + 8T(y"y*') + XT(fflx)
T f (ii(iiV)) = T{xx'x") + 8T(*Ty) + 8TWy) + ZT(xy"y')

(where T denotes trace in E and use is made of the fact that E is associative).
As T(xy) = T(yx) for all quaternions x, y (§ 2, no. 4, formula (17)), it follows
that

(5) T P (( MM X) = T,(«(«V)).

We study in particular octonions of type ( — 1,0, — 1, — 1); formulae (4) then
simplify to

7

(6) i T F («) = 2^o



N






1 =



615



HI TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

*If we take A to be the field R of real numbers, the octonions of type
( — 1,0, — 1, — 1) over R are called Cay ley octonions (or octaves). It follows from
Proposition 2 (ii) of no. 2 that every Cayley octonion =£0 is invertible.*

Proposition 4. Let F be an octonion algebra of type ( — 1,0, —1, —1) over A.
There exists a vector space V of dimension 3 over the field with two elements Z/2Z
and a bisection X i-&gt; e' K ofV onto the basis (^)o&lt;i&lt;7 such that

(7) e' Q = e , e&amp;l = ±e' K+VL

for all X, [l in V. In order that e' K (ele' v ) = (4*u)4&gt; it suffices that, in V, X, (Jt,, v be
linearly dependent over Z/2Z; this condition is necessary if 2 # in A.

We preserve the notation at the beginning of this no. It follows from
formulae (33) of § 2, no. 5 that the set S consisting of the elements ± e , ± e 1}
±*2&gt; ±*3 is stable under multiplication. Moreover, for x, y, y' in E, by
formula (22) of §2, no. 5,

(8) (*, 0) (0, y') = (0, y'x), (0, y') (x, 0) = (0, y'x), (0, y) (0, y') = ( -y% 0)

so that the set T consisting of the elements ± * ( (0 &lt; s &lt; 7) is stable under
multiplication; moreover, its multiplication table is independent of the ring A.

In particular, let A" be the field Z/2Z with two elements and let E" be the
quaternion algebra of type (1, 0, 1) over A" and F" the algebra of octonions
of type (1, 0, 1, 1) over A"; let (e-') 0&lt;i&lt;7 be the basis of F" formed as described
above. Since — e" = e", the set T" of e'[ has 8 elements and is stable under
multiplication; moreover, it follows immediately from the above that the
mapping 0:T-&gt;T" such that 8fo) = Q(-e t ) = 4' for &lt; t &lt; 7 is a homo-
morphism for multiplication. Moreover the quaternion algebra E" is in this
case commutative and hence F" is associative (§2, no. 5, Proposition 5);
further, conjugation in F" is in this case the identity. Hence T" is a group and
formulae (8) show that it is commutative; these formulae and formulae (33)
of § 2, no. 5 show that the square of every element of T" is the unit. If V
is used to denote the group T" written additively, V can be given a unique
vector space structure over Z/2Z, necessarily of dimension 3 since

Card(V) = 8 = 2 alm(v &gt;.

For all X e V, let e' h then denote the element of (^) &lt;i&lt;7 such that 0(&lt;£) = X;
then e' = e ; moreover, as is a homomorphism and the relation 8(#) = 0(y)
is equivalent to x = ±y, e' K el = ±e\ + Vk . If X, \x, v are linearly independent
over Z/2Z, they form a basis of V and hence all the elements e t (0 &lt; i &lt; 7)
would belong to the subalgebra generated by e' K , e' u and e' v ; when 2 ^ in A,
e K( e 'n e v) — {. e Wv) e \ ls therefore impossible, for F would be associative and
hence E would be commutative (§ 2, no. 5, Proposition 5), which contra-
dicts relations (33) of § 2, no. 5. On the other hand, if X, (x, v are linearly

616



APPENDIX

dependent in V, the three elements e' Ky e^, e' y belong to a subalgebra with 2
generators of F, which is therefore associative (no. 1, Proposition 1) ; whence
the conclusion.

Remark. As e' K = —e' K for X # 0,

ek 2 = ~e for X ^ 0,
e 'v. e \ = — e '\ e '\L f° r X t^ 0, (x # and \x # X.



617



EXERCISES



§1

1. Let E be an algebra over a (commutative) field K and L a commutative
extension field of K. Show that, if the algebra E (L) admits a unit element, so
does E (cf. II, § 3, no. 5, Proposition 6).

§2

1. Let E be an A-algebra with a basis of two elements e 1} e 2 and a unit
element e = ~ke x + \xe 2 .

(a) Show that the ideal o of A generated by X and [x is the whole ring A
(in the contrary case, note that E/aE = E (g) A (A/a) = {0} would hold con-
trary to the fact that A/o # {0} and E is a free A-module).

(b) If a, (S are two elements of A such that aX + (3[x = I, show that the
elements e and u = $e x — ae 2 also form a basis of E and deduce that E is a
quadratic A-algebra.

2. Show that every quadratic algebra over Z is isomorphic to an algebra
of type (0, n) with neN, or an algebra of type (m, 0) with m a non-square,
or an algebra of type (m, 1), where m is an integer which is not of the form
k(k — 1); moreover, no two of these algebras are isomorphic.

3. (a) Let K be a commutative field. Show that, for K to be the centre of
a quaternion algebra of type (a, (3, y) over K, it is necessary and sufficient that
one of the following cases hold: (1) (3y # 0; (2) y = 0, (3 # Oandp 2 + 4a # 0;
(3) (3 = 0, a ^ or y ^ and 2 # in K.

(b) Let K be a commutative field such that 2 # in K; show that the
quaternion algebra over K of type (1, y) is isomorphic to the matrix algebra
M 2 (K) (consider the basis of this algebra consisting of the elements £(1 + i),
i(l - i), U + */2y), UJ ~ *)).

(c) Let K be a commutative field such that 2 ^ in K and let E be the
quaternion algebra over K of type (a, y). A quaternion zeEis called pure
if z = —z (or also T(z) = 0). Show that if z is pure, so is every quaternion
tzt _1 , where t e E is invertible.

618



EXERCISES

(d) If u, v are any two quaternions, uv — vu is pure. Deduce that if u, v, w
are any three quaternions, then

(uv — vu) 2 w = w(uv — vu) 2 .

(e) Show that if there exists in E a quaternion z ^ such that N(z) = 0,
there also exists a pure quaternion z' ^ such that N(z') = 0. (Note, in
the notation of formula (33) (no. 5), that, if a is not a square in K, the exis-
tence of z 7^ in E such that N(z) =0 is equivalent to the existence of an
element y e K + Ki such that y = N(y).)

5. Over a commutative field K in which 2 = 0, every quaternion algebra
E of type (a, 0, y) is commutative and the square of every *eE belongs to K;
the subalgebra K(#) of E generated by an element x e K is therefore a quad-
ratic algebra of type (X, 0) over K and E is a quadratic algebra over K(*).

Show that the set C of x e E whose square is equal to the square of an ele-
ment of K is a vector subspace of E whose dimension is equal to 1 , 2 or 4.
If G is of dimension 1 (in which case G = K), E is a field. If G is of dimen-
sion 2, there exists a quadratic algebra K(x) contained in E which is a field
and E has a basis over K(x) consisting of two elements 1 and u with u 2 = 0;
the set of y e E such that y 2 = is an ideal a of dimension 2 over K and E/a
is isomorphic to K(#). Finally, if C is of dimension 4 (and hence equal to E),
the set o of y e E such that y 2 = is an ideal of dimension 3 and E/a is iso-
morphic to K; there exists in E a basis (1, e ly e 2 , e 3 ) such that e\ = e\ = e 2 = 0,
e^e^ — e 3 , e 1 e 3 = e 2 e 3 = 0; Ke 3 = b is the only ideal of dimension 1 in E,
b is the annihilator of a and a/b is the direct sum of two ideals of E/b, of dimen-
sion 1, which annihilate one another.

6. Let K be a commutative field in which 2^0 and E a quaternion algebra
over K of type (0, 0, y).

(a) If y is not a square in K, there exists no left (resp. right) ideal in E of
dimension 1 over K; the set a of x e E such that x 2 = is a two-sided ideal of
dimension 2 over K and E/a is a field, a quadratic algebra over K.

(b) If y is a square ^0 in K, there exists in E a basis (^)i&lt;i&lt;4 with the
following multiplication table :





«1


*2


*3


*4


«1


*1





*3





*2





*2





*4


*3





*3








*4


*4












619



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

The set a of x e E such that x 2 = is a two-sided ideal of dimension 2, the
direct sum of the two two-sided ideals K&lt;? 3 and K* 4 which annihilate one
another; the latter are the only (left or right) ideals of dimension 1 in E. The
quotient algebra E/o is isomorphic to the product of two fields isomorphic to K.
(c) If y = 0, the set a of x e E such that x 2 = is a two-sided ideal of dimen-
sion 3; Kk = b is the only (left or right) ideal of dimension 1 in E; it is a two-
sided ideal, the left and right annihilator of a. In the quotient algebra E/b,
o/b is the direct sum of two two-sided ideals of dimension 1 which annihilate
one another; finally E/ct is a field isomorphic to K.

7. Let K be a commutative field in which 2^0 and E the algebra over K
with a basis of four elements 1, i,j, A; (1 the unit element) with multiplication
table

P = p = k 2 = 1, ij = ji = k, jk = kj = i, ki = ik = j.

Show that E is isomorphic to the product of four fields isomorphic to K (consider
the basis of E consisting of the elements (1 + et)(l + e'j), where e and s'
are equal to 1 or —1).

The algebra E is the algebra (over K) of the product of two cyclic groups
of order 2. Generalize this to the algebra of the product group of n cyclic
groups of order 2 (cf. § 4, no. 1, Example 2).

8. The quaternionic group Q (I, § 6, Exercise 4) is isomorphic to the multi-
plicative group of the eight quaternions ±1, ±i, ±j, ±k in the quaternion
algebra of type ( — 1, — 1) over a field in which 2^0. Show that the algebra
of the group Q over a field K in which 2 ^ is isomorphic to the product of four
fields isomorphic to K and the quaternion algebra of type (+ 1, —1) over K
(if c is the element of Q corresponding to the quaternion —1, the elements
of O can be written as e, i,j, k, c, ci, cj, ck; consider the basis of E consisting
of the elements \{e + c), \{e - c), £(« + c)i, \{e - c)i, %{e + c)j, \{e - c)j,
%{e + c)k, \{e - c)k).

9. (a) Show that the algebra E of the dihedral group D 4 of order 8 (I, § 6,
Exercise 4) over a field K in which 2 # is isomorphic to the product of four
fields isomorphic to K and the algebra of matrices of order 2 over K. (If
a, b are the two generators of D 4 introduced in I, § 6, Exercise 4, the elements
of D 4 can be written as aW with ^ i ^ 3, ^ j ^ 1 ; consider the basis
of E consisting of the four elements \{e + a 2 ), \{e - a 2 ), %{a + a 3 ), %(a - a 3 )
and these four elements multiplied on the right by b; use Exercise 4.) Deduce
that, if — 1 is a square in K, the algebras over K of the non-isomorphic groups
Q and D 4 are isomorphic.

(b) Show similarly that the algebra F of the dihedral group D 3 of order 6
over a field K in which 2^0 and 3 # is isomorphic to the product of two
fields isomorphic to K and the matrix algebra of order 2 over K (consider here

620



EXERCISES



the basis of F consisting of the elements e + a + a 2 , a + a 2 - 2e, a - a 2 and
these three elements multiplied on the right by b).

10. Let G be a group and H a normal subgroup of G. Show that, if a is
the two-sided ideal of the group algebra A (G) , generated by the elements
ts — s, where t runs through H and s runs through G, the group algebra
A (G/H) is isomorphic to the quotient algebra A (G) /a.

1 1 . Let A be a commutative ring and S a commutative monoid with iden-
tity element e. Suppose that an external law (s, x) i-&gt; X s is given on A with
S as domain of operators, such that, for all seS, the mapping x ^ X s is an
automorphism of the ring A and (x*)* = *«* for all x e A and s and t in S (which
implies that e is the identity operator for the external law considered). Then
a multiplicative internal law of composition is denned on the A-module A (S) ,
whose canonical basis is denoted by (b s ), by the relation



(?*«*•) (2 *a) = ?L?a«^H



where the a St t belong to A.

Show that this law and addition on A (S) define a ring structure on this set,
provided the a St t satisfy the conditions

a s,t a st,u — a tu a s,tu

for all s, t, u in S. The element b e is unit element of this ring if also

a e,s = a s ,e = 1

for all s e S; in that case A can be identified with a subring of A (S) and if G
denotes the subring of A consisting of the elements invariant under all the
automorphisms *■-**■, A (S) is a C-algebra, called the crossed product of the
ring A and the monoid S, relative to the factor system {a s&gt;t ). If the factor system

(a Stt ) is replaced by (— -a Stt ), where, for all s e S, c s is an invertible element

\ c st I

of A and c e = 1, the new crossed product obtained is isomorphic to the crossed
product defined by the factor system (a Sft ).

If in particular A is taken to be a quadratic algebra over a ring C and S a
cyclic group of order 2, say {e, s}, such that *• = x for x e A, show that every
crossed product of A and S is a quaternion algebra over C.

12. Let I be a non-empty set. Show that the elements of the free magma
M(I) can be identified with the sequences (ai) 1&lt;i&lt;n (n an arbitrary integer
^ 1) where the a t are either elements of I or a special symbol P (representing
the "open brackets"), where these sequences satisfy the following conditions:

(i) The length n of the sequence is equal to twice the number of symbols
P which appear in it, plus 1.

621



HI TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(ii) For all k &lt; n — 1, the number of symbols P which appear in the sub-
sequence (flf ) i &lt; { &lt; fc is ^kj2.

(Use Set Theory, I, Appendix to associate with each sequence (a 4 ) an element
of M(I) ; for example, to the sequence WFxyzPxy corresponds the word

(((*y)*)te))0

f 13. Let A be a commutative ring and E an A-module. An A-module
E n is defined inductively by writing

E ± = E, E n = (E p &lt;8&gt; A E fl ) for n &gt; 2.

p + q = n

00

We write ME = E n and an A-algebra structure is defined on ME by

«= i

setting, for x p e E p and x q e E Q , x p x q = x p &lt;g&gt; x q e E p + q .

(a) Show that for every A-algebra B and every A-linear mapping/: E -&gt; B,
there exists one and only one A-homomorphism of algebras ME -» B extend-
ing/. ME is called the free algebra of the A-module E.

(b) An integer a(n) is defined by induction on n by the formulae

«(1), a(n) = 2 a(p)a(q) if n &gt; 2.

p + q = n

Show that E n is isomorphic to the direct sum of a(ri) modules isomorphic to

E® n .

oo

(c) Let/(T) be the formal power series 2* a(n)T n . Show that

/(T) = T + (/(T))».
♦Deduce the formulae

rrr\ 1 - VF^lT , . . 0n-1 1 .3.5 . . ■ (2» - 1)
/(T) = g and fl (")= 2 ^i •*

(d) If I is any set and E = A (I) , show that Lib A (I) is identified with ME.

There are canonical homomorphisms M(I) -&gt; N (I) -» N whose composition
is length in M(I); a(m) is called the multidegree ofweM(I); the mapping
o) defines on Lib A (I) a graduation of type N a) . Show that the set (Lib A (I)) a
of homogeneous elements of multidegree a e N (I) under this graduation is a
free A-module of rank equal to

, \ t s nl on t 1-3.5... (2« - 1)
a(a) = a(n) — t = 2 n_1 \ '-

where a! = 1 1 (a(z')) ! and n = 2* &lt;x.(i) = 1(a) is the length of a.
622



EXERCISES

14. (a) Let M be a monoid whose law of composition is denoted by T ;
suppose further that M is totally ordered by an order relation x &lt; y such that
the relations x &lt; y and x' &lt; y', or x ^ y and x' &lt; y', imply xT x' &lt; y T y'.
Show that if A is an integral domain, the algebra over A of the monoid M
has no divisors of 0.

(b) Deduce that if A is an integral domain, every polynomial algebra
A[(X J ), eI ] is an integral domain.

(c) If A is an integral domain and /and g two polynomials in A[(X t ) ieI ]
such that fg is homogeneous and #0, show that /and g are homogeneous.
In particular, the invertible elements of the ring A[(X i ), eI ] are the invertible
elements of the ring A.

15. Let A be a commutative ring and n an integer ^2 such that for all
a e A the equation nx = a has a solution x e A. Let m be an integer ^ 1 and
u a polynomial in A[X] of the form X mn + /(X) where/is of degree ^ mn — 1;
show that there exists a polynomial v e A[X] of the form X m + w, where
w is of degree &lt;m — 1, such that u — v n is zero or of degree &lt;m(n — 1).

m

16. Let A be a commutative ring and u = 2* a fc X fc a divisor of in the

n

ring A[X]. Show that if v = Z, b k X. k is an element #0 of A[X] of degree n
such that uv = 0, there exists a polynomial w =£ of degree &lt; n — 1 such
that uw = 0. (Reduce it to the case where b # 0; if a k v = for
^ k &lt; m — 1, show that we can take w = b ; if a k v = for

0&lt;£&lt;/&gt;^m-l

n-l

and a p v ^ 0, show that a p b = and therefore we can take w = Z* a p b k + iX fc .)
Deduce that there exists an element c ^ of A such that cu = 0.

1 7. Let A be a commutative ring. Show that, in the algebra A[X] of poly-
nomials in one indeterminate over A, the mapping (m, v) i-&gt;- u(v) is a law
of composition which is associative and left distributive with respect to addi-
tion and multiplication in A[X]. If A is an integral domain, show that
the relation u{v) =0 implies that u = or that v is constant and that, if
u # and the degree of v is &gt;0, the degree of u(v) is equal to the product of
the degrees of u and v.

18. Let K be a commutative field and K[X] the ring of polynomials in
one indeterminate over K. Show that every automorphism s of the ring K[X]
leaves K invariant (Exercise 14(r)) and induces on K an automorphism of
this field; show further that necessarily j(X) = dX + b, with a ^ in K

623



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

and ieK (cf. Exercise 17). Conversely, show that being given an auto-
morphism ct of K and two elements a, b of K such that a ^ defines one and
only one automorphism s of K[X] such that s | K = ct and s(X) = aX. + b.
If G is the group of all automorphisms of the ring K[X] and N the subgroup
of G consisting of the K.-algebra structure of K[X], show that N is a normal
subgroup of G and that G/N is isomorphic to the automorphism group of
the field K; the group N is isomorphic to the group defined on the set K* x K
by the law of composition (X, |a)(X', [i') = (XX', X'[x + [x').

19. Prove the polynomial identity in 8 indeterminates

(X? + XI + X| + X 2 )(Y 2 + Yl + Y§ + Y 2 )

= (X X Y X - X 2 Y 2 - X 3 Y 3 - X 4 Y 4 ) 2
+ (X X Y 2 + X 2 Y X + X 3 Y 4 - X 4 Y 3 ) 2
+ (XiY, + X 3 Y X + X 4 Y 2 - X 2 Y 4 ) 2
+ (XiY* + X 4 Y X + X 2 Y 3 - X 3 Y 2 ) 2 .

(Apply formula (32) of no. 5 to a suitable quaternion algebra.)

20. Show that there exists no polynomial identity in 6 indeterminates

(X? + XI +X§)(Yi + YI + Y|) = P 2 + Q 2 + R 2

where P, Q,, R are three polynomials with coefficients in Z with respect to
the indeterminates Xj and Y { . (Observe that 15 = 3.5 cannot be written in
the form p 2 + q 2 + r 2 , where p, q, r are integers.)

21. Let S be a multiplicative monoid with identity element e, satisfying
condition (D) of no. 10 and further satisfying the two following conditions:
(1) the relation st = e implies s = t = e: (2) for all .re S, the number n
of terms in a finite sequence (ti) 1&lt;i&lt;n of elements distinct from e and such that
hh • • • 'n = s is less than a finite number v(j) depending only on s.

Show that, for an element x = 2-, cCgS of the total algebra of S over a ring A

to be invertible, it is necessary and sufficient that &lt;x e be invertible in A (reduce
it to the case where cc e = 1 and use the identity

e - z n+1 = (e - z){e + z + • • • + z n )).

22. If K is a commutative field, show that in the ring of formal power
series K[[X l5 X 2 , . . . , X p ]] there is only a single maximal ideal, equal to the
set of non-invertible elements. On the other hand, show that in the poly-
nomial ring K[X 1} . . . , X p ] for p ^ 1 there always exist several distinct
maximal ideals.

624



EXERCISES



23. Let K be a commutative field; show that there exists no formal power
series w(X, Y) e K[[X, Y]] such that, for an integer m &gt; 0,

(X + Y)a(X, Y) = X m Y m .

24. Let K be a commutative field and let k be an integer such that k ^
in K. Show that for every formal power series u of K[[X]] with constant term
equal to 1, there exists a formal power series v e K[[X]] such that v k = u.

25. Let A be a ring, commutative or otherwise, and let or be an endomorphism
of A. On the additive product group E = A N an internal law of composition

is defined by writing (a n )((3 n ) = (y n ), where y n = 2_ b ol p o p {%) (with the
convention a°(£) = £).

(a) Show that this law defines, with addition on E, a ring structure on E,
admitting as unit element e the sequence (&lt;x n ) where &lt;x = 1 and a n =
for n ^ 1. The mapping which associates with every £eA the element
(&lt;x n ) e E, such that a = £, a n = for n ^ 1, is an isomorphism of A onto a

00

subring of E, with which it is identified. Then we write 2 &lt;x n X n instead of

n = "
ao

(a,) and X?$ = c p (p)X p for all peA; if u = 2 a n X n # 0, the smallest

n —

integer n such that &lt;x n ^ is called the order of u and denoted by &amp;&gt;(«).

(^) If A is a ring with no divisor of and a is an isomorphism of A onto
a subring of A, show that E is a ring with no divisor of and that

(x&gt;(uv) = w(w) + 0)(»)

for u # and z; # 0.

00

(c) For m = Z, q a n X n to be invertible, it is necessary and sufficient that a
be invertible in A.

(d) Suppose that A is a field and a an automorphism of A. Show that E
admits a field of left fractions (I, § 9, Exercise 15) and that in this field F
every element ^0 can be written uniquely in the form aX"*, where u is an
element of E of order 0.

Tf *26. (a) Let A and B be two well-ordered subsets of R (which are neces-
sarily countable; cf. General Topology, IV, §2, Exercise 1). Show that A + B
is well-ordered and that, for all c e A + B, there exists only a finite number
of ordered pairs (a, b) such that a e A, beB and a + b = c (to show that a
non-empty subset of A + B has a least element, consider its greatest lower
bound inR).

(b) Let K be a commutative field. In the vector space K R , consider the
vector subspace E consisting of the elements (an x ) such that the set (depending

625



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

on (a*)) of x eR such that a* ^ is well-ordered. For any two elements (a*),
(P*) of E, we write (* x )$ x ) = (y x ), where y x = ^Z^ a y p 2 (a sum which is
meaningful by virtue of (a)). Show that this law of composition defines, with
addition, afield structure on E; the elements of E are also denoted by 2* a t X*

and called formal power series with well-ordered real exponents, with coefficients
in K.*

§3

1. Let A be a commutative monoid written additively with the identity
element denoted by 0, all of whose elements are cancellable. Let E be a graded

A-algebra of type A and suppose that E admits a unit element e = 2&lt; e a
where e % e E a . Show that necessarily e = e e E .

§4

Tf 1 . Let A be a commutative ring, E, F two A-algebras, M a left E-module,
N a left F-module and G the algebra G = E &lt;g&gt; A F. For every ordered pair
of endomorphisms u e End E (M), v e End F (N), there exists one and only one
G-endomorphism w of M® A N such that w(x &lt;g&gt;y) = u(x) &lt;g) v(y) for
x e M, y e N and we can write w = §{u &lt;g) v), where &lt;j&gt; is an A-linear mapping
(called canonical) of End E (M) ® A End F (N) into End G (M (g) A N). Suppose
in what follows that A is afield.

(a) Show that the canonical mapping &lt;j&gt; is injective (consider an element

z = 2 «i ® » () where the v t e End F (N) are linearly independent over A and

write (&lt;j&gt;(z))(# a 0y) = f° r every element x v of a basis of M over A and all
yeN).

(b) Suppose that M is a finitely generatedfree E-module. Show that the mapping
§ is bijective in each of the following cases: (1) E is of finite rank over the
field A; (2) N is a finitely generated F-module.

(c) Suppose that M is a free E-module and that there exist a y e N and an
infinite sequence (v n ) of endomorphisms of the F-module N such that the vector
subspace (over A) of N generated by the v n (y) is of infinite rank over A.
Show that, if the mapping &lt;j&gt; is bijective, every basis of M over E is necessarily

finite.

(d) Suppose still that M is a free E-module. Show that, for the G-
module M ® A N to be faithful, it is necessary and sufficient that the F-
module N be faithful (consider a basis of E over A).

^[ 2. Let K be a commutative field, E, F two fields whose centre contains
626



EXERCISES



K, M a left vector space over E and N a left vector space over F; let
G = E® K F.

(a) Let x i£ be an element of M and y^Oan element of N. Show that
x ®y is free in the G-module M ® K N (use Exercise 1(d) and the transi-
tivity of End E (M) (resp. End P (N)) in the set of elements of M (resp. N)
distinct from 0).

(b) Show that M ® K N is a free G-module. (If (m a ) is a basis of M over E
and (n 3 ) a basis of N over F, show that the sum of the G-modules G(m a ® n p )
is direct, using a method analogous to that of (a).)

§5

1. Let N be the Z-module Z/4Z, M the submodule 2Z/4Z of N and
j:M-&gt;N the canonical injection. Show that l(j ) : T(M) -+ T(N) is not
injective.

2. Let I and J be two finite sets, I = lu {a}, J = J u {£}, where a and p
are two elements not belonging to I and J respectively, and suppose that
I and J are disjoint. Let E be a vector space of finite rank over a commuta-
tive field K and let z be an element of Tj(E). For all i e I, let W f ' be the sub-
space of E* consisting of the ** e E* such that c^(z &lt;g&gt; **) = (V„ being the
contraction of index i e I and index (3 e J in Tj (E)) and let Vj be the sub-
space of E orthogonal to W 4 '. For alljej, let W y be the subspace of E con-
sisting of the x e E such that cf(z ® x) = (c* being the contraction of index
a e I and index j e J in Tj°(E)) and let V; be the subspace of E* orthogonal
to W y . Show that z belongs to the tensor product (® V,) &lt;g) (&amp; Vy) canonic-
ally identified with a subspace of Tj(E). Moreover, if (U t ) iel is a family of
subspaces of E, (Uy) yeJ a family of subspaces of E* such that z belongs to the

tensor product (® U ( j ® ((§) U,), identified with a subspace of Tj(E), then
V { cz U 4 and V; c= u; for all i e I and j e J (cf. II, § 7, no. 8, Proposition 17).

3. Let M be a finitely generated projective A-module. For every endo-
morphism u of M, let u denote the tensor 6m X («) e M* ® a M corresponding
to it.

(a) For every element xgM, show that u(x) = c\(x &lt;g&gt; u), where x &lt;g&gt; u
belongs to M ® M* ® M = Tg^M).

(6) Let u, v be two endomorphisms of M and w = u°v; show that
w = &lt;|(ff &lt;8&gt; «), where y ® u belongs to Tj^g^M).

(c) For every automorphism s of M and every tensor z e Tj(M), a tensor
j.z e Tj(M) is defined by the condition that if z = ® z fc where z*. e M
for A; g I and z k e M* for k e J, then s. z = z£ with z£ = j(z fc ) if k e I,

627



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

z'k = t s~ 1 (z k ) if he]. Show that the group GL(M) operates by the law
(s, z) i-&gt; s. z on the A-module Tj(M), the mappings z^-s.z being automorph-
isms of this A-module. Moreover, for every ordered pair of indices i e I,

c^s.z) = s.c)(z).

If M is projective and finitely generated, show, in the notation of Exercise 2,
that s.u = (s o u or 1 )".

4. Let M be a finitely generated projective A-module; for every bilinear
mapping aofMxM into M, let u denote the tensor 6 m -1 (m) in T{iJ 2 }(M).
Show that for the algebra structure on M defined by u to be associative, it
is necessary and sufficient that the tensors c\(u &lt;g) u) and c%(u (g) u) correspond
under the canonical associativity isomorphism of T{iJ 2 ,3}(M) ontoT{iJ 3t4} (M).

^[ 5. Let E be a vector space over a commutative field K and let T(E) be
the tensor algebra of E.

(a) Show that T(E) contains no divisors of and that the only invertible
elements in T(E) are the scalars ^0. If dim(E) &gt; 1, T(E) is a non-commuta-
tive K-algebra.

(b) Let u, v be two elements of T(E). Show that, if there exist two elements
a, b of T(E) such that ua = vb ^ 0, one of the elements u, v is a right multiple of
the other. (Consider first the case where u and v are homogeneous; reduce it to
the case where E is finite-dimensional and write u = e^u^ + • • • + e n u n ,
v = e x v ± + • • • + e n v n , where (e k ) is a basis of E. Conclude by arguing by
induction on the smallest degree of the homogeneous components of ua.)
Deduce that, if dim(E) &gt; 1, the ring T(E) admits no field of left fractions
(I, § 9, Exercise 15).

(c) Show that for two non-zero elements u, v of T(E) to be permutable, it
is necessary and sufficient that there exist a vector x # in E such that u
and v belong to the subalgebra of T(E) generated by x (use (b)). Deduce that,
if dim (E) &gt; 1, the centre of T(E) is equal to K.

^[ 6. Let K be a commutative field and E, F two K-algebras each with a
unit element which is identified with the unit element 1 of K. Consider the
K-algebra T(E © F), where E © F is considered as a vector space over K;
E (resp. F) is identified with a vector subspace of T(E © F) under the canonical
injection. Let 3 be the two-sided ideal of T(E © F) generated by the ele-
ments x-y &lt;S) x 2 — (x x x 2 ) and y-y ®y 2 — (#1^2) &gt; where x t e E, y % e F, i = 1,2;
let E * F denote the quotient algebra T(E © F)/3; it is called the^f^ product
of the K-algebras E and F; let § denote the canonical homomorphism of
T(E © F) onto E * F and a and (3 the restrictions of ^ to E and F; a and (3
are YL-algebra homomorphisms.

(a) Show that for every ordered pair of K-homomorphisms «:E-*-G,

628



EXERCISES



v:F-&gt;G into a K-algebra G, there exists one and only one K-homomorphism
w :E * F -&gt; G such that u = w o a and n = o/op (which justifies the termino-

!ogy)-

(6) Let R n be the vector subspace of T(E © F) the sum of the T fc (E © F)
for ^ k ^ n and write 3 n = 3 n R n . Show that, if we consider a basis of E
consisting of 1 and a family fo.) X6lj and a basis of F consisting of 1 and a
family (/u) weM , then a supplementary subspace of 3 n + £.„_! is obtained
in R n by considering the subspace of R n with basis the elements of the form
Zi ® z 2 &lt;g&gt; • • • ® z n where, either z 2y + x is equal to one of the e K for 2/ + 1 ^ n
and z 2i is equal to one of the / B for 2; &lt; «, or z 2j+1 is equal to one of the f u
for 2/ + 1 &lt; n and z 2 , is equal to one of the e K for 2/ ^ n (argue by induc-
tion on n).

(c) Let P n = (j&gt;(R n ) c E * F; then P n &lt;= P n + 1 , P = K, P ft P fc c P ft+fc and
E * F is the union of the P n . Show that there is a canonical vector space iso-
morphism, for n ^ 1,

P»/Pn-i -&gt; (Gi ® G 2 &lt;g&gt; . • . ® G n ) © (G 2 &lt;g&gt; G 3 ® • • • &lt;g&gt; G n+1 )

where we write G fc = E/K for A; odd, G fc = F/K for A: even. In particular the
homomorphisms a and (5 are injective, which allows us to identify E and F
with sub-K-algebras of E * F. P; (resp. P£) is used to denote the inverse
images in P of G x ® G 2 &lt;g&gt; • • . ® G n (resp. G 2 &lt;g&gt; G 3 ® • • . ® G n + 1 ) ; the
A«£to of an element z £ E * F, denoted by h(z), is the smallest integer such
that z e P n ; if h{z) = n and z e F' n (resp. z e P£), z is called pure odd (resp.
/wr* even). Then P n = P; + K and P; n P£ = P n . x for n ^ 1.

(d) Show that, if w, &amp; are two elements of E * F such that h(u) = r, h(v) = s,
then h{uv) &lt; h(u) + h(v) and that h(uv) = h(u) + h(v) unless u and v are
pure and, either r is even and w, p are not of the same parity, or r is odd and a, &amp;
are of the same parity. (If for example r is even, u e P r ', » e P s ', show that
uv e P r+S _i is possible only if u e P r _ x or v e P s _!.)

(e) Suppose that E has no divisors of zero and, in the notation of (d), sup-
pose that r is even, u pure even and v pure odd. Show that h{uv) = r + s — 1
unless there exist two invertible elements x, y of E such that uyeP r _ 1 and
*6eP s _ x . (Let (a,) (resp. (b,)) be the basis of the supplementary subspace
of 3 r + R r _! in R r (resp. of 3 S + R s _ x in R s ) considered in (b); write

m = Z &lt;KaO*i and = 2, y/K*j)&gt; where *, and y, are in E, and show that,
if MZ&gt;eP r+s _ 2 , then necessarily ^eK.) Treat similarly the other cases
where h(uv) &lt; h(u) + h(v) when E and F are assumed to have no divisors of
zero.

(f) Deduce from (d) and (e) that, when E and F have no divisors of zero,
nor does E * F.

(g) Generalize the above definitions and results to any finite number of
unital K-algebras.

629



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

^ 7. Let E be a vector space of finite dimension n over a field K. For every
integer r ^ 1, the symmetric group &lt;S r operates linearly on the tensor product
E® r by the action (a, z) ^a.z such that

C. (*! ® * 2 ® * " ' ® *r) = ^o-^l) ® *o _1 (a) ® • ■ • ® *o-*(r)

for every sequence of r vectors (*,) 1&lt;1&lt;r of E. Let u a {z) = a.z. Show that for
every sequence (»j)i«i&lt;r of r endomorphisms of E,

(*) Tr( Mo o ( 0l &lt;g&gt; y 2 &lt;g&gt; • • • &lt;g&gt; p r )) = Tr^OTrCwa) . . . Tr(a; fc )

where the endomorphisms w, of E are defined as follows: cr" 1 is decomposed
into cycles, a" 1 = X^ . . . X fc and, if X, = (h i 2 • . • 4), we write

«&gt;; = v h o » ia o . • • o p lfc .

(Reduce it to calculating the left hand side of (*) when each v t is of the form
x ■-&gt; &lt;*, 4&gt;%, where (fl,) 1&lt;J&lt;B is a basis of E and (a?) 1&lt;i&lt;n the dual basis.)

If 8. Let A be an integral domain and K its field of fractions; for every
A-module M, let t(M) denote its torsion module (II, § 7, no. 10).

(a) Show that for the algebra T(M) to have no divisors of zero, it is neces-
sary and sufficient that the A-module T(M) be torsion-free (observe that
T(M) (K) is isomorphic to T(M (K) ) and use Exercise 5).

(b) Let m:M-&gt;M' be an injective A-module homomorphism. Show that
Ker(T(ti)) c t(T(M)) ; if M' is torsion-free, then Kcr(T(«)) = t(T(M)) (cf.
II, § 7, no. 10, Proposition 27).

(c) Give an example of a torsion-free A-module M such that t(T(M))
is non-zero (II, § 7, Exercise 31).

If 9. Let A be a commutative ring, F the free associative algebra over A
of the set of integers I = (1, w),, where n ^ 2, and X f (1 &lt; t &lt; n) the corre-
sponding indeterminates, so that a canonical basis of F over A consists of the
products XjjXfc . . . X ir , where (i lt ... t i r ) is an arbitrary finite sequence of
elements of I.

(a) Let C 2 denote the set of commutators [X { , X,] = X^X, — XpQ for
1 &lt;: i &lt;j &lt;: n. Assuming that C m _i is defined, C m denotes the set of elements
[Xj, P] = X t P - PX ( , where U i ^ » and P runs through G m _i. Let U
be the graded subalgebra of F generated by 1 and the union of the C m for
m ^ 2. Show that, for 1 &lt; i &lt; n, [X { , P] e U for all P e U (confine it to the
case where P is a product of elements of U G m and argue by induction on the

number of factors) .

(b) Suppose from now on that A is a field. For every integer m ^ 0, let U m
be the vector A-space of homogeneous elements of degree m in U (so that
U = A, U x = {0»; choose a basis R m&gt;1 , . . ., R m , dlB in each U m , consisting

630



EXERCISES

of products of elements of U C fc . For every ordered pair of integers (m, k)

such that m ^ 2, 1 &lt; k ^ d m , let E m&gt; k be the vector sub-A-space of U generated
by the R p&gt; j such that/&gt; &gt; m or p = m and j ^ A;; show that E m&gt; k is a two-sided
ideal of U and that, if L m fc is the left ideal of F generated by E Wf k , L m&gt; fc is a
two-sided ideal of F.

(c) For every multiindex a = (a 1} . . . , oc n ) e N n , we write

X a = X? X" 2 . . . X£\

Show that the elements X a R m&gt; fc (m &gt; 0, 1 ^ k ^ d m ) form a basis of F over K.
(To prove that these elements form a generating system of the vector space
F, prove that every element X (l . . . Xj r is a linear combination of them by
induction on the degree r. To see that the X a R m&gt; k are linearly independent,
argue by reductio ad absurdum by considering the maximum degree with respect
to one of the X { of the monomials X a which would appear in a linear relation
between the X a R m fc and proceed by induction on this maximum degree;
for this, reduce it to the case where K is infinite (considering if necessary
F (g) K K' for an extension field K' of K) and observe that when X t + X is
substituted in an R m&gt; k for Xi, for some X e K', the element R m k is unaltered).

(d) Show that the two-sided ideal 3(F) of F generated by the commutators
[m, v] = wo — vu of elements of F is the sum of the U m for m ^ 2; F/3(F) is
isomorphic to A[X l5 . . . , X n ] and hence is an integral domain.

(e) Show that the algebra U is not a free associative algebra by proving
that the quotient U/3(U), where 3(U) is generated by the commutators of
elements of U, admits nilpotent elements #0. (Consider the image z' in
U/S(U) of the element z = [X„ X y ] of U; z' 2 * but z' 4 = 0.)

10. Let A be a commutative ring,

M' -?-&gt; M -U M" — &gt;

an exact sequence of A-modules and n an integer &gt;0. Let L = Coker(T n («))
so that there is an exact sequence

-rn(M') ^&gt; T n (M) -&gt; L -&gt; 0.
For every subset J of the set {1, 2, ...,«}, we write

Pj = N x N 2 &lt;g&gt; • • • ® N n , where N, = M' if i ej, N, = M if i £J
(P is therefore equal to T n (M)) and

Q^Ni^Na® ••• ®N n , whereN^M'ifieJ.Nt = M'ifi£J

(Q0 is therefore equal to T n (M").) For every integer i such that &lt; i ^ n,
let P (i) denote the submodule of T n (M) generated by the union of the images

631



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

of the Pj for all the subsets J such that Card (J) = i and let L (i) be the canonical
image of P &lt;0 in L.

(a) Show that there exists a canonical surjective homomorphism

© Qj-&gt;L (1) /L&lt; i + 1 &gt;

Card(J) = l ^ '

(cf. II, § 5, no. 6, Proposition 6).

(b) If the sequence 0-&gt;M'4-M4 M" -&gt; is exact and splits, show that
the homomorphism defined in (a) is bijective.

§6

1. If M is a monogenous A-module, then S(M) = T(M). Deduce an exam-
ple of an injective homomorphism j : N -&gt; M such that S(j):S(N) -&gt; S(M)
is not injective (§ 5, Exercise 1).

2. Establish for symmetric algebras the properties analogous to those of
Exercise 8(a) and (b) of § 5.

3. Let K be a field, B the polynomial ring K[X l5 X 2 ] and p the ideal of B
generated by the polynomial Xi — X 2 .

(a) Show that p is prime and therefore A = B/p is an integral domain. Let
a and b denote the canonical images of Xi and X 2 in A; a and b are not
invertible in A and a 3 = b 2 .

(b) Let m be the (maximal) ideal of A generated by a and b. Show that the
symmetric algebra S(m) is not an integral domain. (Observe that m is
identified with the quotient module A 2 /N, where N is the submodule of A 2
generated by (b, —a); conclude that S(m) is isomorphic to the quotient ring
A[U, V]/(RJ — aV) and show that in the polynomial ring A[U, V] the
principal ideal (bV — aXJ) is not prime, by considering the product
b\bV* - U 3 ).)

*[[ 4. Let A be a commutative ring and a an ideal of A. The Rees algebra of
the ideal a is the subalgebra R(a) of the polynomial algebra A[T] in one in-
determinate, consisting of the polynomials c + c{£ + • • • + £ n T n , where
c eA and c k e a k for every integer k ^ 1.

(a) Show that there exists one and only one surjective A-algebra homo-
morphism r:S(a) -&gt; R(a) such that the restriction of r to a is the A-linear
mapping x -&gt; xT.

(b) Suppose that the ring A is an integral domain. Let a 1 ,...,a n be ele-
ments of A with a n 7t 0; consider the A-algebra homomorphism

M :A[X 1 ,...,X n ]-^A[T]

such that tt(Xj) = a[Y. The kernel r = Ker(w) is a graded ideal whose homo-

632



EXERCISES



geneous component r m of degree m consists of the homogeneous polynomials
/of degree m such that f(a ly . . . , a n ) = 0. If r' c r is the ideal of A[X l5 . . . , X n ]
generated by the homogeneous component v x of t, show that the A-module
r/r' is a torsion A-module. (To verify that, for all /g t m , there exists c^O
in A such that cfe r', argue by induction on m, by writing

/(Xi, . . ., X n ) = X 1 / 1 (X 1 , . . ., X n ) + X 2 / 2 (X 2 , . . ., X n ) + • • • + X n / n (X n )

where the f, are homogeneous of degree m — 1 ; consider the polynomial
g(Xi, . . ., Xn) = X 1 / 1 (a 1 , . . ., a n ) + X 2 / 2 (fl2, • • •, « n ) + • • • + V»W»
observe that ^GtjCt' and form a™~ x f — X™ x g.)

(c) Deduce from (b) that when A is an integral domain, the kernel of the
homomorphism r of (a) is the torsion module of S(a). Deduce that, for S(a)
to be an integral domain, it is necessary and sufficient that S(a) be a torsion-
free A-module. In particular, if the ideal a is a projective A-module, S(o)
is an integral domain and isomorphic to R(a).

Tf 5. Let E be a vector space of finite dimension n over a field K.

(a) Show that for every integer m the symmetric power S m (E) and the vector

space S„(E) of symmetric contravariant tensors of order m have the same

,. . (m + n — 1\ In + m — 1\
dimension I 1 = I i.

\ n - 1 / \ m /

*(b) If K is of characteristic p &gt; 0, show that the vector space SJ(E) of

symmetrized tensors of order p has dimension I J (observe that if, in a tensor

product *! (g) x 2 &lt;S&gt; • • - ® x p ofp vectors of E, x { = x } for an ordered pair of
distinct indices i, j, then the symmetrization of this product is zero; use the
fact that if (H^^,. is a partition of {1, 2, . . .,p} into non-empty sets, com-
prising at least two sets, the subgroup of 6 P leaving each of the H t stable has
order not divisible by p). On the other hand, the canonical image in S P (E)
of the space S£(E) of symmetric tensors of order p is of dimension n and is
generated by the images of the tensors x &lt;g&gt; x ® • • • &lt;g&gt; x (p times), where
x e E (use the same remark) ; the canonical mapping of Sp(E) into S P (E) is
therefore not bijective although the two vector spaces have the same dimen-



sion/



§7
1 . Let A be an integral domain and K its field of fractions.

2

(a) Show that the exterior power Ak of the A-module K reduces to 0.

p

{b) For every A-module EcR, show that every exterior power AE is a

torsion A-module for p ^ 2.

633



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

2

(c) If E is the A-module defined in II, § 7, Exercise 31, show that AE

is non-zero. Give an example of an integral domain A and an A-module E

p

contained in the field of fractions K of A such that no exterior power AE

reduces to 0.

2. For every ideal a of a ring A and every A-module E, the exterior algebra
A(E/aE) is isomorphic to (AE)/o(AE).

3. Give an example of a ring A with the following property: in the A-
module E = A 2 , there exists a submodule F such that, ifj:F-&gt;E is the

2 2 2

canonical injection, Ay is identically zero even when neither AE nor AF
reduces to (II, § 4, Exercise 2).

4. Let E be a free A-module of dimensions ^ 3. Show that if 1 &lt; p ^ n — 1

p n-p

the A-modules AE and A E are isomorphic; but if 2p ^ n, there exists no

p n-p

isomorphism &lt;j&gt; of AE onto A E such that for every automorphism u of E,

&lt;j&gt; ° \A«/ = I A w ° (j&gt; (if (e t ) is a basis of E, consider the automorphism u
such that m(^) = e t + e j} y(e k ) = e k for k ^ i, and give i and j all possible
values).

5. Let K be a commutative field, E, F two vector spaces over K and u a

p
linear mapping of E into F of rank r. Show that if p ^ r the rank of Aw

is equal to I I and that if p &gt; r, Aw is identically zero (take in E a basis r
vectors of which form a basis of a subspace supplementary to « -1 (0) and the
rest a basis of u (0)).

Tf 6. Let K be a commutative field and E a vector space over K.

00

(a) For an element z = Z, z v Iwith z D e Ae] of the exterior algebra AE

x * p =

of E to be invertible, it is necessary and sufficient that z =fi (prove it first
when E is finite-dimensional and then pass to the general case, noting that

for all z e AE there exists a finite-dimensional subspace F of E such that

zeAF).

(b) Suppose that K is such that 2 # in K. Show that, if E is infinite-
dimensional or of even finite dimension, the centre of the algebra AE consists
of the elements such that z p = for all odd indices/*. If E is of odd dimension

n

n, the centre of AE is the sum of the above subspace and AE. In all cases,
634



EXERCISES



the centre of Ae is identical with the set of elements of Ae permutable with
all the invertible elements of AE.

7. For every A-module E, show that, if we write [u, v] = u A v — v A u
for any two elements of Ae, then for any three elements u, v, w of AE,
[[&gt;, v],w] =0.

H 8. Let E be a free A-module.

(a) Show that in T n (E), 8£ (no. 1) is a free sub- A-module equal to the kernel
of the endomorphism z*-+ a.z and admits a supplement which is a free A-

n

module; AE is therefore canonically isomorphic to A£(E). If also in A the
equation 2£ = implies I = 0, then A£(E) = A;(E).

*(b) Suppose that A is a field of characteristic p &gt; and that/&gt; ^ 2. Then

p
the canonical image of Ap(E) = A£(E) in A E is zero.

(c) Suppose that A is a field of characteristic 2. Then A£(E) = S£(E),
A£(E) = S^E), but in general A^(E) # A^E).*

9. Let E be an A-module. The skewsymmetrization of a linear mapping g
of T n (E) into an A-module F is by definition the linear mapping ag of T n (E)
into F such that ag(z) = g(az) for all z e T n (E) ; if &lt;j&gt; : E n -&gt; T n (E) is the canon-
ical mapping, the n-linear mapping ag o &lt;j&gt; is also called the skewsymmetriza-
tion of the n-linear mapping g o &lt;j&gt;. Deduce from Exercise 8(a) that if E is
free every alternating n-linear mapping of E n into F is the skewsymmetriza-
tion of an n-linear mapping of E n into F.

^[ 10. Let E be an A-module with a generating system of n elements. Show
that every alternating n-linear mapping of E n into an A-module F is the
skewsymmetrization of an n-linear mapping of E n into F. (Let a, (1 &lt; j &lt; n)
be the generators of E and &lt;j&gt;:A n -&gt; E the homomorphism such that §{e } ) = a }
for ally, where (e t ) is the canonical basis of A n . If/:E n -&gt; F is an alternating
n-linear mapping, so is/ "- (*i&gt; • • •&gt; *n) *-»-/(&lt;K*i)» • • ■» &lt;K*n)) J snow that if £o
is an n-linear mapping of (A n ) n into F such that/ = a go&gt; go can also be
written as (x u ...,*») "&gt;g(${xi)&gt; • • -, $ (*»)), where i is an """near mapping
ofE n intoF.)

Tf 11. Let K be a commutative field in which 2 = 0, A the polynomial
ring K[X, Y, Z] and E the A-module A 3 /M, where M is the submodule of
A 3 generated by the element (X, Y, Z) of A 3 ; finally, let F be the quotient
A-module of A by the ideal AX 2 + AY 2 + AZ 2 . Show that there exists an
alternating bilinear mapping of E 2 into F, which is the skewsymmetrization
of no bilinear mapping of E 2 into F, but that in T 2 (E) the module %l is equal
to the kernel of the endomorphism z •-&gt; az (consider T 2 (E) as a quotient

635



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

module of T 2 (A 3 ) and show that the kernel of z h&gt; az is the canonical image
of the module of symmetric tensors S^A 3 )).

If 12. In the notation of Exercise 1 1, let B be the quotient ring

A/(AX 2 + AY 2 + AZ 2 )

and let G be the B-module E ® A B. Show that in T 2 (G), the module % n 2 is
distinct from the kernel of the endomorphism z h» az (method analogous to
that of Exercise 11).

13. (a) Let M be a graded A-module of type N. Show that there exists on
the algebra S(M) (resp. A(M)) one and only one graduation of type N under
which S(M) (resp. A(M)) is a graded A-algebra and which induces on M the
given graduation. Show that if the homogeneous elements of even degree in
M are all zero (in which case the graduation on M is called odd), the graded
algebra A (M) thus obtained is alternating (§ 4, no. 9, Definition 7).

(b) Given a graded A-module of type N, consider the following universal
mapping problem: S is the species of anticommutative graded algebra struc-
ture (§4, no. 9, Definition 7), the morphisms are A-homomorphisms of
graded algebras (§ 3, no. 1) and the a-mappings are the graded homo-
morphisms of degree of M into an anticommutative graded A-algebra. Let
M~ (resp. M + ) denote the graded submodule of M generated by the homo-
geneous elements of odd (resp. even) degree. Show that the graded algebra
G(M) = A(M") A S(M + ) is anticommutative; a canonical injection j of
M into this algebra is defined by writingj (#) = x (g) 1 if x eM~ ,j (x) = 1 ® x
if x g M + . Show that the graded algebra G(M) and the injection j constitute
a solution of the above universal mapping problem.

G(M) = A(M-) (g) A S(M + )

is called the universal anticommutative algebra over the graded A-module M.

(c) Prove the analogues of Propositions 2, 3 and 4 for the universal anti-
commutative algebra. Consider the case where M admits a basis consisting
of homogeneous elements: find explicitly in this case a basis of the universal
anticommutative algebra.

14. Let M be a projective A-module and let x lt . . . , x n be linearly indepen-
dent elements of M; for every subset H = {i 1} . . ., i m } of m &lt; n elements of
the interval (1, n), where i ± &lt; i 2 &lt; • • • &lt; i m , we write

*h = x h A x h A • • • A x in .

Show that when H runs through the set of subsets of (1, n) with m elements,
the # H ar e linearly independent in A(M).

636



EXERCISES



15. Let M be an n-dimensional free A-module. Show that every generating
system of M with n elements is a basis of M.



§8

1 . In a matrix U of order n, if, for each index i, the column of index i is
replaced by the sum of the columns of index ^i, the determinant of the matrix
obtained is equal to ( — l) n-1 (n — 1) det U. If in U, for each i, the sum of the
columns of index #* is subtracted from the column of index i, the determinant
obtained is equal to — (n — 2)2 n_1 det U.

2. Let A = det(ocy) be the determinant of a matrix of order n; for

1 &lt; * &lt; n — 1
and 1 ^ j &lt; n — 1, we write

a ii a i,y+i

Show that the determinant det((3 w ) of order n — 1 is equal to

a 12 a 13' • • a l,n-lA«

3. Show the identity



P« =



*1


Vx


a 13


a 14 .


• a ln


A X X 2


%2


y 2


a 24 .


• a 2n


A 1 A 2 #3


A 2 Xq


#3


^3 •


• &lt;*3n



XjX 2 . . . "^ n - x x n X 2 . . . X n _iA: n X 3 . . . "k n -\X n X 4 . . . X n _]# n ... #„

= (*1 - *l#l)(*2 ~ ^2) • • • (*n-l - *n-l#n-l)*n-

Deduce the following identities:
1 1 1 ... 1



= (% - h) O2 - b 2 ) ... (a n - b n )



bi


a x


a x .


. a x


bx


b 2


a % .


• a 2


bx


b 2


b 3 ■


• a n



637



Ill



TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS



a x b x


a x b 2


a x b 3 .


• &lt;*A


a x b 2


a 2 b 2


a 2 b 3 .


• a 2 b n


a x b 3


a 2 b 3


a 3 b 3 .


• «3*n


a x b n


«2*n


a 3 b n .


• &lt;*A



= a x b n (a 2 b x - a J&gt; 2 ) • • • ( a nh-l - a n-lK)



a 2 a 3 .


• a n


a 3 a±.


.a n b x


a 4 .


. a n b x b 2 .


• #1^3 •


• b n _ x


b 2 b 3 .


-K


a 3 a± .


.a n a x


« 4 .


• a n a 1 b 2 .


. a x b 2 b 3 .


•b n - x


a 2 b 3 .


■b n


b 3 b±.


•Wi


a 4 .


. a n a x a 2 .


. a x a 2 b 3 .


•K-i


a 2 a 3 .


■b n


a 3 a±.


• Mi


%.


. b n b 1 b 2 .


. a x a 2 a 3 .


• a n-l



X


a x


a 2 .


• a n-l 1


a x


X


a 2 .


• a n-X 1


a x


a 2


X


• «n-l 1


a x


a 2


a 3 .


. X 1


a x


a 2


a 3 .


• «n 1



= (a x a 2 ...a n ~ b x b 2 . . . b n ) n K



= (x - a x ){x - a 2 ) ... (x - a n )



X


a x


a 2 .


• «n


a x


X


a 2 .


. a n


a x


a 2


X


• a n


a x


a 2


a 3 .


. X



= (x + a x + a 2 + • • • + a n )(x — a x ) (x — a 2 )
(reduce the last determinant to the preceding one) .
4. Calculate the determinant

a x + b x b x b x ... b x
b 2 a 2 + b 2 b 2 . . . b 2



(x - a n )



A„ =



• «n + K



(express A n in terms of A n _ x ).
638



EXERCISES



5. If the fl t and b i are elements of a commutative field such that fl t + b } ,£
for every ordered pair of indices (i,j), prove that



det

i.i
("Cauchy's determinant").



/ 1 \ _ iTi ( a i ~ ^ b i ~ **)

^+"5' = 2(0, + ^)



6. Show that, if X is a matrix with n rows and m columns, Y a matrix with
p rows and n columns and Z = YX the product matrix with p rows and m
columns, the minors of Z of order q are zero ifn &lt; q;ifq ^ n, they are given
by



detCZ^H) =2det(F UK )det(Z K&gt;H )



where K runs through the set of subsets of (1, n\ with q elements (use formula
(3)of§7,no.2).

7. Let A = det(ay) be the determinant of a matrix U of order n; for each
index i (1 &lt; i &lt; n) let A 4 denote the determinant obtained by multiplying
the element &lt;x iy in U by (3 y for 1 ^j^n. Show that the sum of the n deter-
minants Aj (1 ^ i ^ n) is equal to (p x + (3 2 + • • • + P„)A (expand A { by
the row of index i) .

8. Let A = det(ay) be the determinant of a matrix U of order n and &lt;y
a permutation belonging to &amp; n ; for each index i (1 ^ i ^ «) let A ( be the
determinant obtained by replacing the element oc tf in U by &lt;x, if aG) for 1 ^j^n;
ifp is the number of indices invariant under the permutation a, show that the
sum of the n determinants A t (1 ^ i ^ n) is equal to j&amp;A (same method as in
Exercise 7).

9. Let A be a square matrix of order n, B a. submatrix of A with /&gt; rows and
q columns and C the matrix obtained by multiplying in A, each of the elements
belonging to B by the same scalar a. Show that each term in the total expan-
sion of det C is equal to the corresponding term in the total expansion of det A
multiplied by a scalar of the form a r , where r $s p + q — n and r depends on
the term considered (perform a suitable Laplace expansion of det C).

10. Let T, A be the determinants of two matrices U, V of order n; let H
and K be any two subsets of (1, ») with p elements and (i k ) (resp. (j k )) the
sequence obtained by arranging the elements of H (resp. K) in increasing
order; let r H&gt; K be the determinant obtained by replacing in U the column of
index i k by the column of V of index j k , for 1 &lt; k &lt; p; similarly let A KH
be the determinant obtained by replacing in V the column of index j k by the

639



Ill



TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS



column of U of index i k , for 1 ^ k ^ p. Show that, for every subset H of
(1, «) with^ elements,



TA = 2



H, K^K, H



where K runs through the set of subsets of (1, n\ with/&gt; elements (use formulae
(21) and (22) of no. 6).

11. Let A be the determinant of a square matrix X of order n and A p the
determinant of the square matrix Ax, of order ( "). Show that

A p A n _ p = A(»)
(use formulae (21) and (22) of no. 6).

12. A matrix (&lt;x y ) of order n is called centrosymmetric (resp. skew-centrosym-
metric) if a n _ i+1 , n _ y + 1 = a,, (resp. a n _ i + 1&gt;n _ i + 1 = -a iy ) for 1 &lt; i &lt; n,
1 ^ j &lt;: n.

(a) Show that the determinant of a centrosymmetric matrix of even order
2/» can be expressed in the form of a product of two determinants of order p
and the determinant of a centrosymmetric matrix of order 2p + 1 in the form
of a product of a determinant of order p and a determinant of order/) + 1.

(b) Show that the determinant of a skew-centrosymmetric matrix of even
order 2p can be expressed in the form of a product of two determinants of
order p. The determinant of a skew-centrosymmetric matrix of odd order
2p + 1 is zero if in A the relation 2£ = implies £ = 0; otherwise it can be
expressed in the form of the product of a p + 1 p + 1 by two determinants of order
A

13. Let A = det(a jy ) be a determinant of order n and A w the minor of order
n — 1, the complement of oc iy . Show that



a u


«12 ••


am


&lt;^i


&lt;*21


a 2 p


a 2n


#2


a nl


a n2 • •


^nn


#n


yi


#2 ••


#n


Z



= Az-2(-l) i+ 'A 1 ,* i y,.



If A = and the &lt;x y belong to afield, show that the above determinant is
the product of a linear form in x lt x 2 ,...,x n and a linear form in y 1} y^...,y n
(use Exercise 5 of § 5 and Exercise 8 of II, § 6).

Give an example where this result fails to hold when the ring of scalars A
is not a field (take A to be the ring Z/(6) and n = 2).



640



EXERCISES

14. Show the identity

1 1 1 ... 1

1 a x + a 2 a x 4- a 3 ... a x + a n
1 a 2 + a x a 2 + a 3 ... a 2 + a n
1 a 3 + a x a 3 4- a 2 . . . a 3 + a n

1 a n + a x a n + a 2 a n + a 3 ...

n

= ( _ 1) n 2 n-i2a 1 a 2
(use Exercise 13).



a x _ x a i + x ...a n



15. Show that if the columns of a square matrix of order n over A are
linearly independent, the rows of the matrix are also linearly independent
(cf. II, § 10, Exercise 3).

16. Let E, F be two free A-modules of respective dimensions m and n.
For a linear mapping «:E -&gt; F to be injective, it is necessary and sufficient
that m &lt; n and that, if X denotes the matrix of u with respect to any two
bases of E and F, there exist no scalar (jt =£ such that the products by y.
of all the minors of X of order m are zero.

17. Let

n

(*) 2 *&amp; = (3, (1 ^ i &lt; tn)

7 = 1

be a system of m linear equations in n unknowns over a commutative ring A.
Let Xj (1 ^ j ^ n) be the columns of the matrix X = (a y ) of this system and
y = (fij) ; suppose that in X all the minors of order &gt;p are zero but that
x x A x 2 A • • • A * P # 0. For the system (*) to have a solution, it is necessary
that x x A x 2 A • • • A x p A t/ = 0. Conversely, if this condition holds, there
exist n + 1 elements ^ (1 ^j^n+ 1) of A such that £ n + 1 # and



71

2, ay5, = pj^+x (1 ^ i ^ m).



i = i

18. Let E and F be two free A-modules of respective dimensions m and n,
u:E -&gt; F a linear mapping and X the matrix of w with respect to any two
bases of E and F.

(a) If m ^ n and there exists a minor of X of order n which is invertible,
u is surjective.

(b) Conversely, if u is surjective, show that m ^ n and that there exists

641



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

a minor of X of order n which is non-zero. If further, in the ring A, the ideal
generated by the non-invertible elements is distinct from A, there exists a

n

minor of X of order n which is invertible (consider the exterior power Aw).

(c) Let B be a commutative ring and A the product ring B x B. Give an
example of a surjective linear mapping of the A-module A 2 onto A, all the
elements of whose matrix (with respect to the canonical bases of A 2 and A)
are divisors of zero.

19. Let X be a matrix over a commutative field. For X to be of rank p,
it suffices that there exist a minor of X of order p which is #0 and such that
all the minors of order p + 1 containing this minor of order p are zero (show
that every column of Xis then a linear combination of thep columns to which
the elements of the minor of order p in question belong).

20. Let A be a commutative ring, M an arbitrary A-module and U = (a (/ )
a matrix of type (m, n) with elements in A.

(a) Suppose that m = n and let A = det(U); then, if x 1} . . ., x n are ele-

n

ments of M such that 4, a iy # y = for 1 ^ i &lt; n, then A*| = for every

index i.

(b) Suppose that m and n are arbitrary, that all the minors of U of order &gt; r
are zero and that a minor of order r is invertible, for example that of the matrix
(ocjy) where i &lt; r andj ^ r; then if a { denotes the row of index i in U, the a t of
index &lt; r form a basis of the submodule of A n generated by all the rows of U; for

r

i &gt; r, therefore a { = 2* X jfc fl fc . Then lety l9 . . . , y m be elements of M ; for there to

n

exist elements x lt . . . , x n of M satisfying the system of equations 2-, oc u Xj = y t for

r

1 &lt; £ &lt; m, it is necessary and sufficient that y t = 2* \ ik y k for i &gt; r.

^f 21. Let K be an infinite commutative field, m, n, r three integers ^0
such that r ^ n ^ m, M mn (K) the vector K-space (of dimension mn) con-
sisting of the matrices of type (m, n) over K and V a vector subspace of M m&gt;n (K)
such that r is the greatest value of the rank of matrices XeV. We propose
to prove the inequality

(*) dim(V) &lt; mr.

(a) Show that we can assume that m = n and that the matrix



642



&lt; 3



EXERCISES

belongs to V. Deduce that every matrix X e V is then of the form



*» )



(where X xx is of order r) with the condition X 2X X X2 = (use the fact that for
all \ e K, the matrix %X + X is of rank &lt;r).

(£) Deduce from (a) that, for two matrices X, Y in V,

^21^12 + *2V^12 = 0.

(c) For every matrix Xe V, we write F(Z) = (A r n.Z 12 ) GM r&gt;n (K);/is a
linear mapping and dim(V) = dim(Im(/)) + dim(Ker(/)). On the other
hand, let u x denote the linear form (Y 1;l Y 12 ) h-&gt; Tr(X 2X Y X2 ) on M r&gt; n (K). Show
that the linear mapping X\-^u x of Ker(/) into the dual (M rn (K))* is
injective; complete the proof of (*) by noting that the image under Ih&gt; u x of
Ker(/) is contained in the orthogonal of Im(/).

^[ 22. Let F be a mapping of M n (K) into a set E, where K is a commutative
field, such that, for every triple of matrices X, Y, Z in M n (K),

F{XYZ) = F(XZY).

We except the case M 2 (F 2 ) ; show then that there exists a mapping O of K
into E such that F(X) = 0(det(X)). (Using the Corollary to Proposition 17
(no. 9), show first that, for f/eSL n (K), F(Z) = F(XU); deduce that, in
GL n (K), F(Z) depends only on det(Z). On the other hand, if, for r ^ n — 1,
we write



*-U



show that there exists a matrix Y of rank r such that X r _ x = YX r and Y = X r Y
and deduce that F(X) has the same value for all matrices of rank &lt;n.)

23. In every A-algebra E, if x x , . . . , x n are elements of E, we write

[x x x 2 . ..x n ~\ = 2, ZaX aa) X ai2y . .* a(n) .
ae© n

Show that if E admits a finite generating system over A, there exists an integer
N such that [x x x 2 . • •%] =0 f° r all elements x, (1 ^ j &lt; N) of E.

24. Let X t (1 ^ i ^ m) be square matrices of the same order « over the
commutative ring A. Show that if m is even then (Exercise 23)

Tr[X x X 2 ...X m ] =0

643



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

and if m is odd

Tr[*A. . .X m ] = m.TriX^XA. . .Z m _ 1 ]).

(If X is the cyclic permutation (1, 2, . . ., m), G the cyclic subgroup of 6 m
generated by X and H the subgroup of €&gt; m consisting of the permutations leaving
tn invariant, note that every permutation in €&gt; m can be written uniquely as
ctt with ceH and tgC; then use the fact that the trace of a product of ma-
trices is invariant under cyclic permutation of the factors.)

^[ 25. Let A be a commutative ring containing the field Q, of rational num-
bers and let X be a square matrix of even order 2n ^ 2 over A. Let L be the
subset {1, 2, . . ., n + 1} of {1, 2, . . ., 2»} and L' its complement. Show the
following formula ("Redei's identity") :

(*) det(X UL ) det(X L . &gt;L .) = 2 (-1) r '_ det(X H , K ) det(X H .. K .)

"I r )

where H runs through the set of subsets of n elements of {1, 2, ... , 2n} contain-
ing 1 and K the set of subsets of n elements of L and r = Card(H n L').
(Evaluate the coefficient of a term x aa)tl x a(2)f2 . . .* a(2n)2n in the right-hand
side of (*) for an arbitrary permutation a e 6 2n , noting that this coefficient can
only be 7^0 if H = a(K) ; show that it can only be ^0 if ct(L) = L.)

26. (a) In the notation of Proposition 19 (no. 10), suppose that there exist
two A[X]-linear mappings^, g 2 of M[X] into M'[X] such that i&gt;' ° g 2 = gi°^;
show that there then exists an A[X] -linear mapping g of M u into M^, such that
V °gi = &lt;i&gt;' ° g- Further, if g x and g 2 are A [X] -isomorphisms of M[X] onto
M'[X], g is an A [X] -isomorphism of M u onto M„,.

(b) In the notation of no. 10, the endomorphisms u, u' are called
equivalent if there exist two isomorphisms f Xi f 2 of M. onto M such that
u' of 2 =f x ou\ they are called similar if there exists an isomorphism/of M onto
M' such that a'o/ = /o«, Deduce from (a) that, for u and u' to be similar, it is
necessary and sufficient that the endomorphisms X — u and X — v! (of the
A[X]-modules M[X] and M'[X] respectively) be equivalent.



§9

1. Let K be a commutative field with at least 3 elements and A the algebra
over K with a basis consisting of the unit element 1 and two elements e 1} e 2 such
that e x = e lt e x e 2 = e 2 , e 2 e x = e\ — 0; let A be the opposite algebra to A.
Show that there exists in A elements x such that Tr A/K (#) ^ Tr A o /K (#) and
N a ,kW ^ N A o /K (*).

644



EXERCISES



§10

1. If A and B are K-algebras and a and p two K-homomorphisms of A into
B, an (a, p) -derivation of A into B is a K-linear mapping d of A into B
satisfying the relation

d{xy) = (dx)x(y) + $(x)(dy) for x,y in A,

in other words, a derivation in the sense of Definition 1 (no. 2) where
A = A' = A", B = B' = B", d = d' = d\ (x: A x A -&gt; A is multiplication,
X x : B x A -&gt; B is the K-bilinear mapping (z, x) h* za(*) and X 2 : A x B -&gt; B
the K-bilinear mapping (*, z) &gt;-&gt; $(x)z.

Suppose henceforth that A and B are commutative fields and that a # (3. Show
that there then exists an element b e B such that d is the (a, (3) -derivation
x h&gt; b&lt;x(x) — $(x)b. (It can be assumed that d # 0. Show first that the kernel
N of d is the set of* e A such that &lt;x(x) = $(x) and then show that for x $ N the
element b = &lt;/(*)/(a(*) - £(*)) is independent of the choice of*.)

2. Let K be a commutative field of characteristic #2, A and B two K-
algebras and a a K-linear mapping of A into B; an oc-derivation of A into B
is a K-linear mapping d of A into B satisfying the relation

d(xy) = (dx)a(y) + &lt;x.(x)(dy) for x,y in A,

in other words, a derivation on the sense of Definition 1 with A = A' = A",
B = B' = B", d = d' = d", [x multiplication in A, Xj the mapping
(z, *) i-&gt; zcc(x) of B x A into B and X 2 the mapping (*, z) h-&gt; &lt;x(*)z of
A x B into B.

Show that if B is a commutative field, an extension of K, and d ^ 0, there
exists b # in B such that

(x.(xy) = cc(x)&lt;x(y) + b(dx)(dy) for x,y in A.

If b — c 2 with ceB, c ^ 0, there exist two homomorphisms /, g of A into B
such that oc(*) = (/(*) + £(*))/2, dx = (/(*) - g(x))/2c. Otherwise, there
exists a quadratic algebra (§ 2, no. 3) B' over B, a jx £ B' such that (x 2 = c,
and a homo morph ism / of A into B' such that &lt;x(*) = (/(*) +/(*))/2,
dx = (/(*) -7W)/2.

^ 3. Let K be a field, commutative or otherwise, E the left vector space
Ks N) and let (&lt;?„) n6N be the canonical basis of this space. On the other hand let
or be an endomorphism of K and d a (ct, 1 K ) -derivation (Exercise 1) of K into
itself, in other words an additive mapping of K into itself such that

dfa) = (^)a(v)) + 5(rfq).

645



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

The elements of E are linear combinations of products a n e n and a multiplication
is defined on E (Z-bilinear mapping of E x E into E) by the conditions

(&lt;W»)(PO = («*n-l)(&lt;*(P)«m + l + («#&gt;») for ft &gt; 1
(&lt;X«o)(P*m) = (aP)«m-

Thus an (in general non-commutative) ring structure is defined on E with
e as unit element (identified with the element 1 of K). If we write X = e 1} then
e n = X n for n ^ 1, so that the elements of E can be written as

&lt;x + otiX H 1- oc n X n ,

with the multiplication rule

Xa = o(a)X + (da) for a e K.

This ring is denoted by K[X; c, d] and is called the ring of non-commutative
polynomials in X with coefficients in K, relative to a and d. For a non-zero element

z = A, KjYJ of E, the degree deg(z) is the greatest integer J such that a, # 0.

(a) Show that if u, v are two elements #0 of E, then:

uv # and deg(wo) = deg(w) + deg(o) ;
deg(w + v) ^ sup(deg(w), deg(z&gt;)) if m + o # 0.

Moreover, if deg(w) ^ deg(o), there exist two elements w, r of E such that
a = wo + r and, either r = 0, or deg(r) &lt; deg(o) ("Euclidean division" in
E).

(b) Conversely, let R be a ring such that there exists a mapping u i-»&gt; deg(w)
of the set R' of elements # of R into N, satisfying the conditions of (a) . Show
that the set K consisting of and the non-zero elements aeR such that
deg(a) = is a (not necessarily commutative) field. If K # R and x is an
element of R for which the integer deg(*) &gt; is the smallest possible, show

that every element of R can be written uniquely in the form 2« ap* with

a.j e K. (To see that every element of R is of this form, argue by reductio ad
absurdum by considering an element ueK which is not of this form and for
which deg(«) is the smallest possible.) Prove that there exist an endomorphism
a of K and a (a, 1 K ) -derivation d of K such that #a = a(a)x + da for all
a £ K. Deduce that R is isomorphic to a field or a ring K[X; a, d].

4. Let M be a graded K-module of type N; show that every graded endo-
morphism of degree r can be extended uniquely to a derivation of degree r of
the universal anticommutative algebra G(M) (§ 7, Exercise 13).

* 5. Let K be a field of characteristic p &gt; 0, B the field K(X) of rational
functions in one indeterminate and A the subfield K(X P ) of B. Show that
the canonical homomorphism Q. K {A) ® A B -*■ Q K (B) is not injective.*

646



EXERCISES
§11

1 . If V is a finitely generated projective A-module, so is End(V), canonically
identified with V &lt;g) A V* (II, § 4, no. 2, Corollary to Proposition 2). If every
element u e End(V) is associated with the A-linear form v *-*■ Tr(uv) on
End(V), an A-linear bijection is defined of End (V) onto its dual (End(V))*.
Identifying End(V) and its dual A-module under this mapping, the A-
algebra structure on End(V) defines by duality (no. 1, Example 3) an A-
cogebra structure on End(V), which is coassociative and has as counit the form
Tr: V-&gt;A. In particular, for V = A n , a cogebra structure is defined on

M n (A) for which the coproduct is given by c{E it ) = Z, E kj (g) E ik . This

cogebra structure and the algebra structure on M n (A) do not define a bigebra
structure.

2. Show that in Definition 3 (no. 4), condition (3) (relative to graded bige-
bras) is equivalent to the following: the product m:E®E-»Eisa morphism
of the graded cogebra E ® E into the graded cogebra E.

3. Show that if M is an A-module there exists on T(M) one and only one
cocommutative bigebra structure whose algebra structure is the usual structure
and whose coproduct c is such that, for all x e M, c{x) = 1 &lt;g) x + x ® 1.

4. Let E be a commutative bigebra over A, m the product E &lt;g) E -&gt; E,
c the coproduct E -&gt;■ E &lt;g) E, e the unit element and y the counit of E.

(a) Show that for every commutative A-algebra B, the law of composition
which associates with every ordered pair

(a, v) e Hom A _ alg .(E, B) x Hom A . alg .(E, B)

the A-algebra homomorphism

_. C _ „U®»„ _ Din

E — &gt; E ®E — &gt; B ®B — ^&gt; B

(where m B is the product in B) defines a monoid structure on Hom A . alg .(E, B).

(b) In order that, for every commutative A-algebra B, Hom A . alK .(E, B) be a
group, it is necessary and sufficient that there exist an A-algebra homomor-
phism i : E -&gt; E such that i (e) = e and the composite mappings mo(l E &lt;gu)oc
and fflo(i®l E )o( are both equal to the mapping x h-&gt; y(x)e. i is then called
an inversion in E; it is an isomorphism of E onto the opposite bigebra E°.

5. Let E 1? E 2 be two bigebras over A. Show that on the tensor product
Ei ®a E 2 the algebra and cogebra structures the tensor product of those on E x
and E 2 define on E x &lt;g) A E 2 a bigebra structure.

6. Let M be a graded A-module of type N. Define a skew graded bigebra
structure on the universal anticommutative algebra G(M) (§ 7, Exercise

647



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

13); deduce a canonical graded algebra homomorphism G(M*) -&gt; G(M)** r
and notions of inner product between elements of G(M) and elements of

G(M*).

7. With the hypotheses and notation of Proposition 11 (no. 9), prove the
formula

(dtt g )^- 1 =A(g)o^oA( t g).

Form this formula and (79) (no. 11) derive a new proof of the expression for
the inverse of a square matrix using the matrix of its cofactors (§ 8, no. 6,
formula (26)).

8. Let E be a free A-module of dimension n. For every A-linear mapping

n

v of A (M) into an A-module G, we can write v = 2* v p , where v p is the

n

restriction of v to A(M); we then set i\v = 2* ( — 1)%, so that yfv = v. Let

u be an isomorphism of M onto its dual M* and let A be the determinant of the
matrix of u with respect to a basis (e { ) of M and the dual basis of M* (a deter-
minant which does not depend on the basis of M chosen). If § is the isomor-
phism of A(M) onto A(M*) denned starting with e = e x A e 2 A • • • A e n ,
show the formula

7}» + 1 A(|&gt; = A( f tt) o (J)" 1 o A(tt).

9. The adjoint of a square matrix X of order n over A is the matrix
X = (det(X n )) of minors of X of order n — 1. Show that if Xis invertible then
det(Z) = (detZ) n_1 and that every minor det (^ h ,k) of x of order p is
given by the formula

(1) det (Z H&gt;K ) = (detX^-^HMr)

where H' and K' are the complements of H and K respectively in (1, w)
("Jacobi's identities"; use relation (80) of no. 11).

10. From every identity O = between minors of an arbitrary invertible
square matrix X of order n over A another identity O = can be derived
called the complement of O = 0, by applying the identity O^ = to the minors of
the adjoint X of X and then replacing the minors of X by functions of the
minors of X using identity (1) of Exercise 9. In this way show the following
identity:

det(Z Jft ) det(X' fc ) - det(Z ifc ) det(Z^) = (det*) dct^"'**) for * &lt;j

where X iU hk denotes the minor of X of order n — 2 obtained by suppressing in
Zthe rows of index i,j and the columns of index h, k.

648



EXERCISES

Tf 11. Let &lt;D = be an identity between minors of an invertible square
matrix X of order n over a commutative ring A, &lt;I&gt; = the complementary
identity (Exercise 10) and k an integer &gt;0. Let Y be an invertible square
matrix of order n + k and let Y be the submatrix of the adjoint matrix Y
formed by suppressing in Y the rows of index &lt;£ and the columns of index
^ k. If Y is assumed to be invertible and the identity &lt;E&gt; = is applied to the
minors of Y and then each minor which appears in this identity (considered
as a minor of Y) is replaced by its expression as a function of the minors of Y,
using identity (1) of Exercise 9, an identity O fc = is obtained between minors
of the matrix Y (valid if Y and Y are invertible) which is called the extension
of order k of the identity $ = 0.

In particular, Let A = (ay) be an invertible square matrix of order n + k,
B the submatrix of A of order k obtained by suppressing in A the rows and-
columns of index &gt; k and A w the determinant of the matrix of order k + 1
obtained by suppressing in A the rows of index &gt;k except that of index k + i
and the columns of index &gt; k except that of index k + j; if C denotes the
matrix (A y ) of order n, show the identity

detC= (det^)(det J B) n " 1

valid when A and B are invertible (show that it is the extension of order k
of the total expansion of a determinant of order n).

State the identities obtained by extending the Laplace expansion (§ 8, no.
6) and the identity of Exercise 2 of § 8.

^f 12. Let X = (£ tj ) be a square matrix of order n over a commutative field
K; let H be a subset of (1, n) with p elements and H' the complement of H in
(1, ft); suppose that, for every ordered pair of indices h e H, k e H',

2 %„&amp;„ = 0.

Show that, for all subsets L, M of (1, «) with/&gt; elements,

p M&gt;M ,det(Z L ,H) detOY M ,, H ') - Pl.i/ det(Z M&gt;H ) det(X L&gt;H ,) = 0.

(Consider the columns x h of index h e H in X as vectors in E = K n and the
columns x* of index k e H' as vectors in E* and show that the (n — ^)-form
Xr. is proportional to § p (x u ).)

13. Let r and A be two determinants of invertible matrices of order n over
a commutative ring and T ti the determinant obtained by replacing in T the
column of index i by the column of A of index j. Show that

det(r tf ) = F^A.

(Expand r w by the t-th column and use Exercise 9.)

649



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

14. Let M be a free A-module of dimension n &gt; 1. Show that every iso-

p n-p n—p P

morphism ty of A(M) onto A (M*) such that A (tf) o ^ = ty o A(m) for every
automorphism m of M, of determinant equal to 1, is one of the isomorphisms (J&gt;„
defined in Proposition 12 of no. 11 (proceed as in § 7, Exercise 4).

15. Let E be a free A-module of dimension n. Let z be a /-vector over E
and z* a (p + q)-fbrm on E; z can be canonically identified (§ 7, Exercise 8)
with the skewsymmetrization az 1 of a contravariant tensor z x of order p and z*
with the skewsymmetrization of a covariant tensor of order p + q. If, in the
mixed tensor z x . z*, the A&gt;th contravariant index and the (p + &amp;)-th covariant
index are contracted for 1 ^ k ^ p, show that the covariant tensor of order q
thus obtained is skewsymmetrized and is canonically identified with the q-
form z* l. z, up to sign.

16. Let E be a free A-module of dimension n. The regressive product of

n

x e A(E) andy e A(E) with respect to a basis {&lt;?} of A(E), denoted by x V y,

is the element &lt;|&gt;(&lt;K*) A $(#))» the isomorphism $ being relative to e. This
product is only defined to within an invertible factor, depending on the basis
{e} chosen. Show that if a: is a j&amp;-vector andy a ^-vector, x V y = Oif/&gt; + q &lt; n
and that, if p + q ^ n, x V y is a (/&gt; + q - n) -vector such that

yv«= (-l)&lt; n -* , &gt; (n -«&gt;* V y.

The regressive product is associative and distibutive with respect to addition
and defines on A(E) a unital algebra structure isomorphic to the exterior
algebra structure. Express the components of* v y as a function of those of x
and y for a given basis on E.

1 7. Let K be a commutative field and E a vector space over K.

(a) Let z be a /&gt;-vector ^0 over E and let V g be the vector subspace of E
consisting of the vectors x such that z A x = 0. Then dim(V 2 ) ^ p; if
(*i)i&lt; i&lt;a is a free system of vectors of V 2 , there exists a (/&gt; - ?) -vector o such
that z = v A x x A • • • A x q . If E is finite-dimensional, then V 3 = &lt;J&gt;(M°),
where M° is the orthogonal in E* of the subspace M g associated with z. For z to
be a pure /&gt;-vector, it is necessary and sufficient that dim(V 2 ) = p and then
V 2 = M 3 .

(b) Let z&gt; be a pure /"-vector, zt; a pure ^-vector and V and W the subspaces
of E associated respectively with v and w. In order that V c: W, it is necessary
and sufficient that q^ p and that there exist a (q - p) -vector u such that
w = u A v. In order that VnW = {0}, it is necessary and sufficient that

650



EXERCISES

v A w # 0; the subspace V + W is then associated with the pure (p + q)-
vector v A w.

(c) Let u and v be two purejb-vectors and U and V the subspaces associated
respectively with u and v. For u + v to be pure, it is necessary and sufficient
that dim(U n V) ^ p - 1.

18. Let z = 2., cc n e H be a non-zero pure /&gt;-vector of an n-dimensional vector
space E, expressed using its components with respect to an arbitrary basis
( e i)i&lt;i&lt;n °f E. Let G be a subset of (1, n) with /&gt; elements such that &lt;x G ^ 0; let
(h)i &lt;n&lt;p De tne sequence of indices in G arranged in increasing order and
C/fc)i&lt;fc&lt;n-p tne sequence of indices in the complement G' of G, arranged in
increasing order. For every ordered pair (h, k) of indices such that 1 ^ h ^ p,
1 ^ k ^ n — p, let (3 hfc be the component &lt;x H of z corresponding to the subset H
of (1, n) consisting of the p — 1 indices in G distinct from i h and of index
j k e G'; let X be the matrix (p ftfc ) with p rows and n — p columns. Given an
arbitrary subset L of (1, «) with p elements such that LnCG has q ^ 1
elements, show that (a G ) 9 " 1 a L is equal, up to sign, to the minor of X of order q,
consisting of the rows of index h such that i h e G n C L and the columns of index
k such that j k e L n C G. (Write z as being of the form &lt;x. G y 1 A y 2 A • • • Ay p ,
where the vectors y t are such that, in the matrix Y with n rows and p columns
whose columns are the y u the submatrix consisting of the rows whose indices
belong to G is the unit matrix.)

19. Over a finite-dimensional vector space E, let z = x x A x 2 A • • • A x p be
a pure/&gt;-vector #0; let v* be a ^-form (q ^ p) and u* an arbitrary element of
A(E*). Show that

(«* A v*)jz= (-1) &lt;,(9 - 1)/2 2ph,k&lt;»* 5 %X«*-J^k)

where H runs through the set of subsets of (1, /&gt;) with q elements, K is the com-
plement of H in (l,/&gt;) and # H (resp. # K ) denotes the exterior product of the x {
such that / e H (resp. ieK.).

20. Let E be an n-dimensional vector space, z a pure ^-vector over E, V
the vector subspace of E associated with z, u* a pure ^-vector over E*, W the
subspace of E* associated with u* and W the subspace of E, of dimension
n — q, orthogonal to W. If q &lt; p, u* j z is a pure (p — q) -vector over E,
which is zero if dim(V n W) &gt; p — q; if dim(V nW) = p — q, VnWis
associated with u* j z.

21. (a) Show directly (without using the isomorphisms (J&gt; p ) that every
(« — 1) -vector over an n-dimensional vector space is pure.

(b) Let A be a commutative algebra over a field K with a basis consisting
of the unit element 1 and three elements a 1} a 2 , a 3 whose products with one

651



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

another are zero. Let E be the A-module A 3 and (e^ &lt;i&lt;3 its canonical basis;
show that the bivector

a x (e 2 A e 3 ) + a 2 (e 3 A e x ) + a 3 (e 1 A e 2 )

is not pure.

22. Let E be an ordered set in which every interval (a, b] is finite. Let S be
the subset of E x E consisting of the ordered pairs (x, y) such that x &lt; y. Show
that a coassociative cogebra structure is defined on the A-module A (S) of
formal linear combinations of the elements of S by taking as coproduct

c((x,y)) = „£*(*&gt; z ) &lt;8&gt; (z,y).
For this cogebra the linear form y such that

t(( x &gt;y)) = ^ x ^yinE, y((*, x)) = 1
is a counit.

23. Let C be a cogebra over a ring A. A sub-A-module S of G is called a
subcogebra of C if c(S) c Im(S (g) S).

(a) If C is coassociative (resp. cocommutative), so is every subcogebra. If y
is a counit of C, the restriction of y to any subcogebra of C is a counit.

(b) Which are the subcogebras of the cogebra A (X) (no. 1, Example 4). ?

(c) If (S a ) is a family of subcogebras of C, 2-, S a is a subcogebra of G (the

(X

smallest containing all the S a ).

24. Let C be a cogebra over a ring A. A sub-A-module S of G is called a
right (resp. left) coideal if c(S) &lt;= I m (S ® C) (resp. c(S) cIm(C®S)).

(a) A subcogebra (Exercise 23) is a right and left coideal. The converse is
true if A is a field.

(b) Every sum of right (resp. left) coideals is a right (resp. left) coideal.

(c) If S is a right (resp. left) coideal of C, the orthogonal S° is a right (resp.
left) ideal of the dual algebra C*.

(d) If A is a field and 3' a right (resp. left) ideal of the dual algebra C*, the
orthogonal 3'° in G is a right (resp. left) coideal of C. (Argue by reductio ad
absurdum by assuming that there exists an x e 3'° such that c(x) $ 9'° &lt;g) G;

write c(x) = 2-,yi &lt;g) z { , where the z { are linearly independent, and show that

there would bey' e 9' and z' e C* such that &lt;y'z', #&gt; # 0.)

Deduce that for a vector subspace S of G to be a right (resp. left) coideal, it is
necessary and sufficient that S° be a right (resp. left) ideal of G*.

652



EXERCISES

(e) Deduce from (d) that if A is a field every intersection of right coideals
(resp. left coideals, resp. subcogebras) of C is a right coideal (resp. left coideal,
resp. subcogebra). For S to be a subcogebra of C, it is necessary and sufficient
that its orthogonal S° be a two-sided ideal of the algebra G*.

25. Let G be a cogebra over a ring A. A sub-A-module S of C is called a
coideal if c(S) c Im(S ® C) + Im(G &lt;g&gt; S). If C is counital, with counit y,
a coideal S is called conull if y(#) = for x e S.

(a) A right or left coideal is a coideal. Every sum of coideals is a coideal.

(b) If S is a coideal of C, the orthogonal S° is a subalgebra of the dual algebra
C*. If G is counital and S is conull, S° is unital.

(c) Suppose that A is a field and C a counital cogebra. Show that if E' is a
unital subalgebra of C* with the same unit element as C*, the orthogonal E'° in
C is a conull coideal.

(d) If S is a coideal of C, show that there exists on C/S one and only one
cogebra structure such that the canonical mapping p : G -&gt; C/S is a cogebra
morphism. If C is counital and S is conull, G/S is counital.

(e) For every cogebra morphism/: C -&gt; C, S = Ker( /) is a coideal of C,
S' = Im(/) a subcogebra of C and, in the canonical factorization

G — ^-&gt; C/S — %• S' — ^-&gt; C'
of/, g is a cogebra isomorphism.

(26) Let C be a coassociative counital cogebra over a commutative field
K.

(a) For every vector subspace E of C which is a left C*-module under the
law (u, x) h-&gt; u j x, the left annihilator of this C*-module is a two-sided ideal
3' of the algebra C*. Show that if E is finite-dimensional over K, C*/3' is
finite-dimensional.

(b) Deduce from (a) that for every element x e C, the subcogebra of C
generated by x is finite-dimensional. (Note that the C*-module E generated by
x is finite-dimensional and that, if 3' is its left annihilator, x e 3'°, the ortho-
gonal of 3' in C.)

(27) Let B be an associative unital algebra over a commutative field K and
let m : B (g) K B -&gt;• B be the K-linear mapping defining the multiplication on B.
The tensor product B* ® K B* (where B* is the dual vector, space of the vector
space B) is canonically identified with a vector subspace of (B ® K B)* (II,
§ 7, no. 7, Proposition 16).

(a) Show that for an element w eB* the following conditions are equiva-
lent: (1) ^(w) eB* &lt;g) B*; (2) the set of x _j w, where x runs through B, is a
finite-dimensional subspace of B* ; (3) the set of w i_ x, where x runs through B,
is a finite-dimensional subspace of B* ; (4) the set of x _i w l y, where x and y
run through B, is contained in a finite-dimensional subspace of B*.

653



Ill TENSOR ALGEBRAS, EXTERIOR ALGEBRAS, SYMMETRIC ALGEBRAS

(b) Let B' c: B* be the set of w e B* satisfying the equivalent conditions in
(a). Show that 'm(B') &lt;= B' (g) K B'. (For weB', write 'm(w) = 2, m ( (g)^,,

where for example the w t are linearly independent in B*; show that then
v t g B' for all i using the associativity of B and arguing by reductio ad absurdum.)
B' is therefore the largest cogebra contained in B*, for which *m is the coproduct.
B' is called the dual cogebra of the algebra B. When B is finite-dimensional,
B' = B*.

(c) Show that if B is a commutative field of infinite dimension over K,
B' = {0}. (Note that the orthogonal of the set of x j w, for same w eB*, x
running through B, is an ideal of B.)

(d) Let B 1} B 2 be two K-algebras and/: B x -&gt;B 2 a K-homomorphism of
algebras. Show that y(B 2 ) &lt;=■ B[ and that % restricted to B 2 , is a cogebra
homomorphism of B 2 into B[.

(e) If G is a coassociative counital cogebra over K, the canonical injection
C -&gt; C** of the vector space C into its bidual maps C onto a subspace of
(C*)', the dual cogebra of the algebra C* dual to C, and is a cogebra homo-
morphism of C into (C*)\

APPENDIX

1. Show that in alternative Cayley A-algebra (notation of § 2, no. 4)
T((xy)z) = T(x(yz)). (Reduce it to proving that a(x,y, z) = a(z,y, x).)

2. Let F be an alternative A-algebra, in which the relation 2x = implies
x = 0. Show that, for all x, y, z in F, x{yz)x — (xy)(zx) (Moufang's identity).
(In the identity

(xy)z + y(zx) = x(yz) + (yz)x

successively replace y by xy and z by zx.)

3. Let F be an alternative Gayley A-algebra, in which the relation 2x =
implies x = 0. Show that if x e F is invertible then, for all y, z, t in F,

(N(*) + N(y))(N(z) + N(/)) = N(xz + yl) + N(*t - (*z)(*"V))

(use Exercises 1 and 2).



654



HISTORICAL NOTE

(Chapters II and III)



(N.B. Numbers in brackets refer to the bibliography
at the end of this Note.)



Linear algebra is both one of the oldest and one of the newest branches of
mathematics. On the other hand, at the origins of mathematics are the
problems which are solved by a single multiplication or division, that is by
calculating a value of a function/ (*) = ax, or by solving an equation ax = b:
these are typical problems of linear algebra and it is impossible to deal with
them, indeed even to pose them correctly, without "thinking linearly".

On the other hand, not only these questions but almost everything concern-
ing equations of the first degree had long been relegated to elementary teach-
ing, when the modern development of the notions of field, ring, topological
vector space, etc. came to isolate and emphasize the essential notions of linear
algebra (for example duality) ; then the essentially linear character of almost
the whole of modern mathematics was perceived, of which "linearization"
is itself one of the distinguishing traits, and linear algebra was given the place it
merits. To give its history, from our present point of view, would therefore be
a task as difficult as it is important; and we must therefore be content to give
a brief summary.

From the above it is seen that linear algebra was no doubt born in response
to the needs of practical calculators; thus we see the rule of threef and the rule
of false position, more or less clearly stated, playing an important role in all the
manuals of practical arithmetic, from the Rhind papyrus of the Egyptians to
those used in our primary schools, by way of A~ryabhata, the Arabs, Leonard of



f Cf. J. Tropfke, Geschichte der Elementar-Mathematik, 1. Band, 2te Ausgabe,
Berlin-Leipzig (W. de Gruyter), 1921, pp. 150-155.

655



HISTORICAL NOTE ON CHAPTERS II AND III

Pisa and the countless "calculation books" of the Middle Ages and the Renais-
sance; but they never constituted more than a small part, for the use of practical
men, of the most advanced scientific theories.

As for mathematicians proper, the nature of their research on linear algebra
depends on the general structure of their science. Ancient Greek mathematics,
as expounded in the Elements of Euclid, developed two abstract theories of a
linear character, on the one hand that of magnitudes ([2], Book V; cf. Histo-
rical Note to General Topology, IV) and on the other hand that of integers
([2], Book VII). With the Babylonians we find methods much more akin to our
elementary algebra; they know how to solve, and most elegantly ([1], pp.
181-183), systems of equations of the first degree. For a very long time,
nevertheless, the progress of linear algebra is mainly confined to that of alge-
braic calculations and they should be considered from this point of view,
foreign to this Note; to reduce a linear system to an equation of the type
ax = b, it suffices, in the case of a single unknown, to know the rules (already,
in substance, stated by Diophantus) for taking terms from one side to the other
and combining similar terms; and, in the case of several unknowns, it suffices to
know also how to eliminate them successively until only one is left. Also the
Treatises on algebra, until the XVIIIth century, think that all is accomplished
as far as the first degree is concerned, when they have expounded these rules;
as for a system of as many equations as unknowns (they do not consider others)
where the left hand sides are not linearly independent forms, they are content
to observe in passing that this indicates a badly posed problem. In the treatises
of the XlXth century and even certain more recent works, this point of view
is only modified by the progress of notation, which allows writing systems of n
equations in n unknowns, and by the introduction of determinants which allow
formulae of an explicit solution to be given in the "general case" ; this progress,
the credit for which would have belonged to Leibniz ([7], p. 239) had he
developed and published his ideas on this subject, is mainly due to the mathe-
maticians of the XVIIIth and early XlXth centuries.

But we must first study various currents of ideas which, much more than the
study of linear equations, contributed to the development of linear algebra in
the sense in which we understand it. Inspired by the study of Appollonius,
Fermat [4(a)], having conceived, even before Descartes [5], the principle of
analytic geometry, has the idea of classifying plane curves according to their
degree (which, having become little by little familiar to all mathematicians, can
be considered to have been definitely grasped towards the end of the XVI Ith
century) and formulates the fundamental principle that an equation of the
first degree, in the plane, represents a line and an equation of the second
degree a conic: a principle from which he deduces immediately some "very
beautiful" consequences relating to geometric loci. At the same time, he enun-
ciates [4(6)] the classification of problems into problems with a single solution,
problems which reduce to an equation in two unknowns, an equation in three

656



HISTORICAL NOTE ON CHAPTERS II AND III

unknowns, etc. ; and he adds : the first consist of determining a point, the second
a line or plane locus, the others a surface, etc. (". . . such a problem does not seek
only a point or a line, but the whole of a surface appropriate to the question; here surfaces
as loci have their genesis and similarly for the rest" , loc. cit., p. 186; here already is the
germ of n-dimensional geometry). This paper, formulating the principle of
dimension in algebra and algebraic geometry, indicates a fusion of algebra and
geometry in absolute conformity with modern ideas, but which, as has already
been seen, took more than two centuries to penetrate into men's minds.

At least these ideas soon result in the expansion of analytic geometry which
reaches its fulness in the XVIIIth century with Clairaut, Euler, Cramer,
Lagrange and many others. The linear character of the formulae for trans-
formation of coordinates in the plane and in space, which Fermat cannot have
failed already to have perceived, is put in relief for example by Euler ([8(a)],
Chapters II— III and Appendix to Chapter IV), who here lays the foundation
of the classification of plane curves and that of surfaces according to their
degree (invariant precisely because of the linearity of these formulae) ; he it is
also (loc. cit., Chapter XVIII) who introduces the word "affinity" to describe
the relation between curves which can be derived one from the other by a
transformation x' = ax, y' = by (but without perceiving anything geometri-
cally invariant in this definition which remains bound to a particular choice of
axes). A little later we see Lagrange [9(a)] devoting a whole memoir, which
long remained justly famous, to typically linear and multilinear problems of
analytic geometry in three dimensions. Around about this time, in relation to
the linear problem constituted by the search for a plane curve passing through
given points, the notion of determinant takes shape, first in a somewhat
empirical way, with Cramer [10] and Bezout [11]; this notion is then developed
by several authors and its essential properties are definitively established by
Cauchy [13] and Jacobi [16(a)].

On the other hand, whilst mathematicians had a slight tendency to despise
equations of the first degree, the solution of differential equations was con-
sidered a capital problem; it was natural that, among these equations, linear
equations, with constant coefficients or otherwise, should early be distinguished
and their study contributed to emphasize linearity and related properties.
This is certainly seen in the work of Lagrange [9(b)'] and Euler [8(3)], at least
as far as homogeneous equations are concerned; for these authors see no point
in saying that the general solution of the non-homogeneous equation is the sum
of a particular solution and the general solution of the corresponding homo-
geneous equation and they make no use of this principle (known however to
d'Alembert) ; we note here also that, when they state that the general solution
of the homogeneous linear equation of order n is a linear combination of n
particular solutions, they do not add that these must be linearly independent
and make no effort to make the latter notion explicit; it seems that only the
teaching of Cauchy at the ficole Poly technique throws some light ([14],

657



HISTORICAL NOTE ON CHAPTERS II AND III

pp. 573-574) on these points as on many others. But already Lagrange (loc.
cit.) introduces also (purely by calculation, it is true, and without giving it a
name) the adjoint equation h*(y) = of a linear differential equation
L(y) = 0, an example typical of duality by virtue of the relation



IzL(y) dx = \L*(z)ydx,



valid for y and z zero at the extremities of the interval of integration; more
precisely, and 30 years before Gauss defined explicitly the transpose of a linear
substitution in 3 variables, we see here the first example without doubt of a
"functional operator" L* the transpose or "adjoint" of an operator L given by
means of a bilinear function (here the integral j yz dx).

At the same time and again with Lagrange [9(c)], linear substitutions, in 2
and 3 variables at first, were in the process of conquering arithmetic. Clearly
the set of values of a function F(x,y), when x and y are given all integral
values, does not change when a linear substitution with integral coefficients, of
determinant 1, is performed on x and y; on this fundamental observation
Lagrange founds the theory of representations of numbers by forms and that
of the reduction of forms; and Gauss, by a step whose boldness it has become
difficult for us to appreciate, isolates the notion of equivalence and that of class
of forms (cf. Historical Note to I) ; on this subject, he recognizes the necessity
of certain elementary principles relating to linear substitutions and introduces
in particular the notion of transpose or adjoint ([12(a)], p. 304). From this
moment onwards, the arithmetic study and the algebraic study of quadratic
forms, in 2, 3 and later n variables, that of bilinear forms which are closely
related to them and more recently the generalization of these notions to an
infinity of variables were, right up to the present, to constitute one of the most
fertile sources of progress for linear algebra (cf. Historical Note to IX).

But a perhaps still more decisive progress was the creation by Gauss, in the
same Disquisitiones (cf. Historical Note to I), of the theory of finite commutative
groups, which occur there in four different ways, in the additive group of
integers modulo m (for m an integer), in the multiplicative group of integers
prime to m modulo m, in the group of classes of binary quadratic forms and
finally in the multiplicative group of m-th roots of unity; and, as we have al-
ready noted, it is clearly as commutative groups, or rather as modules over Z,
that Gauss treats all these groups and studies their structure, their relations of
isomorphism, etc. In the module of "complex integers" a + bi, he is later
seen studying an infinite module over Z, whose isomorphism he no doubt
perceived with the module of periods (discovered by him in the complex
domain) of elliptic functions; in any case this idea already appears neatly in
Jacobi's work, for example in his famous proof of the impossibility of a function
with 3 periods and his views on the problem of inversion of Abelian integrals

658



HISTORICAL NOTE ON CHAPTERS II AND III

[16(£)], to result soon in the theorems of Kronecker (cf. Historical Note to
General Topology, VII).

Here, another current joins those whose course and occasional meanders
we have sought to trace, which had long remained underground. As will later
be expounded in more detail (Historical Note to IX), "pure" geometry in the
sense understood in the last century, that is essentially projective geometry of
the plane and space without using coordinates, had been created in the XVIIth
century by Desargues [6], whose ideas, appreciated in their true value by a
Fermat and put into practice by a Pascal, had then been buried in oblivion,
eclipsed by the brilliant progress of analytic geometry; it was revived towards
the end of the XVIIIth century, with Monge, then Poncelet and his rivals
Brianchon and Chasles, sometimes completely and voluntarily separated from
analytic methods, sometimes (especially in Germany) closely intermixed with
them. Now projective transformations, from whatever point of view they are
considered (synthetic or analytic), are of course just linear substitutions on the
projective or "barycentric" coordinates; the theory of conies (in the XVIIth
century) and later that of quadrics, with whose projective properties this
school is principally concerned for a long time, are just that of quadratic forms,
whose close connection with linear algebra we have already pointed out
earlier. To these notions is added that of polarity: also created by Desargues,
the theory of poles and polars becomes, in the hands of Monge and his suc-
cessors and soon under the name of the principle of duality, a powerful tool for
transforming geometric theorems; if it cannot be affirmed that its relation with
adjoint differential equations was perceived during that period (they are
indicated by Pincherle at the end of the century), then at least Chasles did not
fail [17] to perceive its relation with the notion of reciprocal spherical tri-
angles, introduced into spherical trigonometry by Viete ([3], p. 428) and
Snellius as early as the XVIth century. But duality in projective geometry is
only an aspect of duality of vector spaces, taking account of the modifications
imposed when passing from the affine space to the projective space (which is a
quotient space of it, under the relation "scalar multiplication").

The XlXth century, more than any period in our history, was rich in mathe-
maticians of the first order; and it is difficult in a few pages, even restricting
ourselves to the most salient features, to describe all that is produced in their
hands by the coming together of these movements of ideas. Between the purely
synthetic methods on the one hand, a species of Procrustean bed where their
orthodox protagonists put themselves to torture, and the analytic methods
related to a system of coordinates arbitrarily imposed on the space, the need is
soon felt for a geometric calculus, dreamed of but not created by Leibniz and
imperfectly sketched by Carnot: first appears addition of vectors, implicit in
Gauss's work in his geometric representation of imaginary numbers and the
applications he makes of this to elementary geometry (cf. Historical Note to
General Topology, VIII), developed by Bellavitis under the name of "method of

659



HISTORICAL NOTE ON CHAPTERS II AND III

equipollences" and taking its definitive form with Grassmann, Mobius and
Hamilton; at the same time, under the name of "barycentric calculus",
Mobius gives a version of it suitable for the needs of projective geometry [18].

At the same period, and by the same men, the step, so natural (once engaged
on this path), already announced by Fermat, is taken from the plane and
"ordinary" space to ra-dimensional space; indeed an inevitable step, since the
algebraic phenomena which can in two or three variables be interpreted geo-
metrically are still valid for an arbitrary number of variables; thus to impose,
in using geometric language, the limitation to 2 or 3 dimensions, would be for
the modern mathematician just as tiresome a yoke as that which always pre-
vented the Greeks from extending the notion of number to ratios of incom-
mensurable magnitudes. Hence the language and ideas relating to n-dimen-
sional space appear almost simultaneously on all sides, obscurely in the work of
Gauss, clearly in the work of the mathematicians of the following generation;
and their greater or less assurance in using them was perhaps less due to their
mathematical inclinations than to their philosophical or even purely practical
outlook. In any case, Cayley and Grassmann, around 1846, handle these
concepts with the greatest of ease (and this, says Cayley quite contrary to
Grassmann ([22(a)], p. 321), "without recourse to any metaphysical notion");
Cayley is never far away from the analytic interpretation and coordinates,
whereas in Grassmann's work from the start, addition of vectors in w-dimen-
sional space and the geometric aspect take the upper hand, to result in the
developments of which we shall speak in a moment.

Meantime the impulse given by Gauss was pushing mathematicians, in
two different ways, towards this study of algebras or "hypercomplex systems".
On the one hand, it was inevitable to try to extend the domain of real num-
bers otherwise than by introducing the "imaginary unit" i = y/ — 1 and per-
haps thus open up vaster domains just as fertile as that of the complex numbers.
Gauss himself was convinced ([12 (b)], p. 178) of the impossibility of such an
extension, as long as one wants to preserve the principal properties of complex
numbers, that is, in modern language, those which make it into a commutative
field; and, either under his influence or independently, his contemporaries
seem to have shared this conviction, which was only justified much later by
Weierstrass [23] in a precise theorem. But, once multiplication of complex
numbers is interpreted by rotations in the plane, then, if it is proposed to extend
this idea to three dimensional space, (since the rotations in space form a non-
Abelian group) non-commutative multiplications have to be envisaged; this is
one of Hamilton's! guiding ideas in his discovery of quaternions [20], the first
example of a non-commutative field. The singular nature of this example (the
only one, as Frobenius was later to show, which can be constructed over the



f Cf. the interesting preface of his Lectures on quaternions [20] where he retraces the
whole history of his discovery.

660



HISTORICAL NOTE ON CHAPTERS II AND III

field of real numbers) somewhat restricts its import, in spite of or perhaps even
because of the formation of a school of fanatical "quaternionists" : a strange
phenomenon, which was later reproduced around the work of Grassmann,
and then by the vulgarizers who draw from Hamilton and Grassmann what is
called "vector calculus". The abandoning a little later of associativity, by
Graves and Cayley who construct the "Cayley numbers", opens up no very
interesting path. But after Sylvester had introduced matrices and (without
giving it a name) had clearly defined their rank [21], again it was Cayley
[22 (b)~\ who created the calculus of matrices, not without observing (an essen-
tial fact often lost sight of later) that a matrix is only an abridged notation for a
linear substitution, just as Gauss denoted the form aX 2 + 2£XY + cY 2 by
(a, b, c). This is just one aspect, the most interesting for us of course, of the
abundant production by Sylvester and Cayley on determinants and every-
thing connected with them, a production full of ingenious identities and im-
pressive calculations.

Also (amongst other things) Grassmann discovers an algebra over the reals,
the exterior algebra which still bears his name. His work, earlier even than that
of Hamilton [19(a)], created in an almost complete moral solitude, remained
for a long time little known, no doubt because of its originality, because also of
the philosophical mists, in which it begins by enveloping itself and which for
example at first deterred Mobius. Moved by preoccupations analogous to those
of Hamilton but of greater import (and which, as he soon sees, are the same as
those of Leibniz), Grassmann constructs a vast algebraico-geometric edifice,
resting on a geometric or "intrinsic" conception (already more or less axioma-
tized) of n-dimensional vector space; among the more elementary results at
which he arrives, we quote for example the definition of linear independence
of vectors, that of dimension and the fundamental relation

dim V + dim W = dim(V + W) + dim(V n W)

(be. city p. 209; cf. [19(A)], p. 21). But it is especially exterior multiplication,
then inner multiplication, of multivectors which provide him with the tools
with which he easily treats first the problems of linear algebra proper and then
those relating to the Euclidean structure, that is orthogonality of vectors
(where he finds the equivalent of duality, which he does not possess).

The other path opened up by Gauss in the study of hypercomplex systems is
that starting from the complex integers a + bi; after these follow quite naturally
algebras or more general hypercomplex systems, over the ring Z of integers
and over the field Q, of rationals, and first of all those already envisaged by
Gauss which are generated by roots of unity, then algebraic number fields and
modules of algebraic integers : the former are the principal topic in the work of
Kummer, the study of the latter was undertaken by Dirichlet, Hermite,
Kronecker and Dedekind. Here, in contrast to what happens with algebras
over the reals, it is not necessary to abandon any of the characteristic properties

661



HISTORICAL NOTE ON CHAPTERS II AND III

of commutative fields and attention was confined to the latter throughout the
XlXth century. But linear properties and for example the search for the basis
for the integers of the field (indispensible for a general definition of the dis-
criminant) play an essential role at many points; and with Dedekind at any
rate the methods are destined to become typically "hypercomplex"; Dedekind
himself moreover, without setting himself the problem of algebras in general, is
conscious of this character of his works and of what relates them for example to
the results of Weierstrass on hypercomplex systems over the reals ([24], in
particular vol. 2, p. 1). At the same time the determination of the structure of
the multiplicative group of units in an algebraic number field, effected by
Dirichlet in some famous notes [15] and almost at the same time by Hermite,
was vitally important in clarifying ideas on modules over Z, their generating
systems and, their bases (when such exist). Then the notion of ideal, defined by
Dedekind in algebraic number fields (as a module over the ring of integers of
the field), whilst Kronecker introduces in polynomial rings (under the name of
"systems of modules") an equivalent notion, gives the first examples of modules
over more general rings than Z; and in the work of the same authors, and then
Hilbert, in particular cases the notion of group with operators is slowly isolated,
and the possibility of constructing always from such a group a module over a
suitably defined ring.

At the same time, the arithmetico-algebraic study of quadratic bilinear
forms and their "reduction" (or, what amounts to the same, of matrices and
their "invariants") leads to the discovery of the general principles on the solution
of systems of linear equations, principles which due to the lack of the notion of
rank, had escaped Jacobi.j The problem of the solution in integers of systems
of linear equations with integral coefficients is attacked and solved, first in a
special case by Hermite and then in all its generality by H. J. Smith [25] ; the
results of the latter are found again, only in 1878, by Frobenius, in the frame-
work of a vast programme of research instituted by Kronecker and in which
Weierstrass also participates; incidentally during the course of these works,
Kronecker gives definitive form to the theorems on linear systems with real (or
complex) coefficients, which are also elucidated, in an obscure manual, with
the minute care characteristic of him, by the famous author of Alice in Wonder-
land; as for Kronecker, he disdains to publish these results and leaves them to his
colleagues and disciples; the word "rank" itself is only introduced by Frobenius.
Also in the course of their teaching at the University of Berlin Kronecker [26]
and Weierstrass introduce the "axiomatic" definition of determinants (as an
alternating multilinear function of n vectors in w-dimensional space, normed
so that it takes the value 1 at the unit matrix), a definition equivalent to that



f Concerning the classification of systems of n equations in n unknowns when the
determinant is zero, he says ([16(a)], p. 370): "paullo prolixum videtur negotium" (it
could not be elucidated briefly).

662



HISTORICAL NOTE ON CHAPTERS II AND III

derived from Grassmann's calculus and to that adopted in this Treatise; again
during his courses Kronecker, without feeling the need to give it a name and
in a still non-intrinsic form, introduces the tensor product of spaces and the
"Kronecker" product of matrices (the linear substitution induced on a tensor
product by given linear substitutions applied to the factors).

This research cannot be separated from the theory of invariants created by
Gayley, Hermite and Sylvester (the "invariant trinity" of which Hermite later
speaks in his letters) and which, from a modern point of view, is above all a
theory of representations of the linear group. Here there comes to light, as the
algebraic equivalent of duality in projective geometry, the distinction between
series of cogredient and contragredient variables, that is vectors in a space and
vectors in the dual space; and, after attention has been turned first to forms of
low degree and then of arbitrary degree, in 2 and 3 variables, almost without
delay bilinear, then multilinear forms are examined in several series of "co-
gredient" or "contragredient" variables, which is equivalent to the intro-
duction of tensors; the latter becomes explicit and is popularized when, under
the inspiration of the theory of invariants, Ricci and Levi-Civita, in 1900, in-
troduce into differential geometry "tensor calculus" [28], which later came into
great vogue following its use by the "relativist" physicists. Again the progressive
intermingling of the theory of invariants, differential geometry and the theory
of partial differential equations (especially the so-called problem of Pfaff and
its generalizations) slowly leads geometers to consider alternating bilinear
forms of differentials, in particular the "bilinear co variant" of a form of degree
1 (introduced in 1870 by Lipschitz and then studied by Frobenius), to result in
the creation by E. Cartan [29] and Poincare [30] of the calculus of exterior
differential forms. Poincare introduces the latter, in order to form his integral
invariants, as the expressions which appear in multiple integrals, whilst
Cartan, guided no doubt by his research on algebras, introduces them in a
more formal way, but without failing to observe that the algebraic part of their
calculus is identical with Grassmann's exterior multiplication (whence the
name which he adopts), thus definitively restoring the work of the latter to its
rightful place. The translation, into the notation of tensor calculus, of exterior
differential forms, moreover shows immediately their connection with skew-
symmetric tensors, which, once a purely algebraic point of view is adopted,
shows that they are for alternating multilinear forms what covariant tensors
are for arbitrary multilinear forms; this aspect is further clarified with the
modern theory of representations of the linear group; and thus, for example, the
substantial identity between the definition of determinants given by Weierstrass
and Kronecker and that resulting from Grassmann's calculus is recognized.

We thus arrive at the modern period, where the axiomatic method and
the notion of structure (at first vaguely perceived, and defined only recently)
allow us to separate concepts which until then had been inextricably mixed,
to formulate what was vague or left to intuition and to prove with proper

663



HISTORICAL NOTE ON CHAPTERS II AND III

generality theorems which were known only in special cases. Peano, one of the
creators of the axiomatic method and also one of the first mathematicians fully
to appreciate the work of Grassmann, gives as early as 1888 ([27], Chapter IX)
the axiomatic definition of vector spaces (finite-dimensional or otherwise) over
the field of real numbers and, in a completely modern notation, of linear map-
pings of one such space into another; a little later, Pincherle seeks to develop
applications of linear algebra, thus conceived, to the theory of functions, in a
direction it is true which has not been very fruitful; at least his point of view
allows him to recognize "Lagrange's adjoint" as a special case of the trans-
position of linear mappings: which appears soon, still more clearly, and for
partial differential equations as well as for differential equations, in the course
of the memorable works of Hilbert and his school on Hilbert space, and its
applications to analysis. It is on that occasion that Toeplitz [31], also intro-
ducing (but by means of coordinates) the most general vector space over the
reals, makes the fundamental observation that the theory of determinants is
not needed to prove the principal theorems of linear algebra, which allows
these to be extended without difficulty to infinite-dimensional spaces; and he
also indicates that linear algebra thus understood can of course be applied to an
arbitrary commutative base field.

On the other hand, with the introduction by Banach, in 1922, of the spaces
bearing his name,f spaces not isomorphic to their dual are encountered,
albeit in a problem which is topological as much as it is algebraic. Already
between a finite-dimensional vector space and its dual there is no "canonical"
isomorphism, that is determined by its structure, which had long been reflected
in the distinction between cogredient and contragredient. Nevertheless it
seems beyond doubt that the distinction between a space and its dual was
definitively established only after the work of Banach and its school; also in
these works the importance of the notion of codimension comes to light. As for
duality or "orthogonality" between the vector subspaces of a space and those of
its dual, the way in which it is formulated today presents not just a superficial
analogy with the modern formulation of the principal theorem of Galois theory
(cf. Algebra, V) and with so-called Pontrjagin duality in locally compact
Abelian groups; the latter goes back to Weber, who, in the course of arith-
metical researches, lays in 1886 its foundations for finite groups; in Galois
theory the "duality" between subgroups and subfields takes form in the work of
Dedekind and Hilbert; and orthogonality between vector subspaces derives
visibly, first from duality between linear varieties in projective geometry and
also from the notion and properties of completely orthogonal varieties in a
Euclidean space or a Hilbert space (whence its name). All these strands are
reassembled in the contemporary period, in the hands of algebraists such as



f These are complete normed vector spaces over the field of real numbers or that
of complex numbers.

664



BIBLIOGRAPHY

E. Noether, Artin and Hasse and topologists such as Pontrjagin and Whitney
(not without the ones influencing the others) to arrive, in each of these fields, at
die stage of knowledge whose results are expounded in this Treatise.

At the same time a critical examination is made, which is destined to
eliminate, on each point, the hypotheses which are not completely indispensable,
and especially those which would close the way to certain applications. Thus
the possibility is perceived of substituting rings for fields in the notion of vector
spaces and, creating the general notion of module, of treating at the same time
these spaces, Abelian groups, the particular modules already studied by
Kronecker, Weierstrass, Dedekind and Steinitz and even groups with operators
and for example of applying the Jordan-Holder theorem to them; at the same
time, with the distinction between right and left modules, we pass to the non-
commutative, which arises from the modern development of the theory of
algebras by the American school (Wedderburn, Dickson) and especially the
German school (E. Noether, E. Artin).

Bibliography

1. O. Neugebauer, Vorlesungen tiber Geschichte der antiken Mathematik, Vol. I:

Vorgriechische Mathematik, Berlin (Springer), 1934.

2. Euclidis Elementa, 5 vols., ed. J. L. Heiberg, Lipsiae (Teubner), 1883-88.
2 bis. T. L. Heath, The thirteen books of Euclid's Elements . . ., 3 vols.,

Cambridge, 1908.

3. Francisci Vietae, Opera mathematica . . ., Lugduni Batavorum (Elzevir),

1646.

4. P. Fermat, Oeuvres, vol. I, Paris (Gauthier-Villars), 1891: (a) Ad locos

pianos et solidos Isagoge (pp. 91-110; French transl. ibid., vol. Ill, p.
85); (b) Appendix ad methodum . . . (pp. 184-188; French transl.,
ibid., vol. Ill, p. 159).

5. R. Descartes, La geometrie, Leyde (Jan Maire), 1637 ( = Oeuvres, ed. Ch.

Adam and P. Tannery, vol. VI, Paris (L. Cerf), 1902).

6. G. Desargues, Oeuvres . . ., vol. I, Paris (Leiber), 1864: Brouillon proiect

d'une atteinte aux euenemens des rencontres d'un cone auec un plan
(pp. 103-230).

7. G. W. Leibniz, Mathematische Schriften, ed. C. I. Gerhardt, vol. I, Berlin

(Asher), 1849.

8. L. Euler: (a) Introductio in Analysin Infinitorum, vol. 2, Lausannae, 1748

( = Opera Omnia (1), vol. IX, Zurich-Leipzig-Berlin (O. Fiissli and B. G.
Teubner), 1945); (b) Institutionum Calculi Integralis, vol. 2, Petropoli,
1769 ( = Opera Omnia (1), vol. XII, Leipzig-Berlin (B. G. Teubner),
1914).

9. J.-L. Lagrange, Oeuvres, Paris (Gauthier-Villars), 1867-1892: (a) Solu-

tions analytiques de quelques problemes sur les pyramides triangulares,

665



BIBLIOGRAPHY

vol. Ill, pp. 661-692; (b) Solution de differents problemes de calcul
integral, vol. I, p. 471; (c) Recherches d'arithmetique, vol. Ill, pp.
695-795.

10. G. Cramer, Introduction a V analyse des lignes courbes, Geneva (Cramer and

Philibert), 1750.

11. E. Bezout, Theorie generate des equations algebriques, Paris, 1779.

12. C. F. Gauss, Werke, Gottingen, 1870-1927: (a) Disquisitiones arithmeticae,

vol. I; (b) Selbstanzeige zur Theoria residuorum biquadraticorum,
Commentatio secunda, vol. II, pp. 169-178.

13. A.-L. Cauchy, Memoire sur les fonctions qui ne peuvent obtenir que

deux valeurs egales et de signes contraires par suite des transpositions
operees entre les variables qu'elles renferment, J. Ec. Polytech., cahier
17 (volume X), 1815, pp. 29-112 ( = Oeuvres completes (2), vol. I, Paris
(Gauthier-Villars), 1905, pp. 91-169).

14. A.-L. Cauchy, in Legons de calcul differ entiel et de calcul integral, redigees

principalement d'apres les methodes de M. A.-L. Cauchy by Abbe Moigno,
vol. II, Paris, 1844.

15. P. G. Lejeune-Dirichlet, Werke, vol. I, Berlin (G. Reimer), 1889,

pp. 619-644.

16. C. G. J. Jacobi, Gesammelte Werke, Berlin (G. Reimer), 1881-1891:

(a) De formatione et proprietatibus determinantium, vol. Ill, pp.
355-392; (b) De functionibus duarum variabilium . . ., vol. II, pp.
25-50.

17. M. Chasles, Apergu historique sur Vorigine et le developpement des mithodes en

geometrie . . ., Bruxelles, 1837.

18. A. F. Mobius, Der baryzentrische Calcul. . ., Leipzig, 1827 ( = Gesammelte

Werke, vol. I, Leipzig (Hirzel), 1885).

19. H. Grassmann: (a) Die lineale Ausdehnungslehre, ein neuer Zweig der Mathe-

matik, dargestellt und durch Anwendungen aicf die ubrigen Zweige der Mathe-
matik, wie auch auf die Statik, Mechanik, die Lehre vom Magnetismus und die
Kristallonomie erldutert, Leipzig (Wigand), 1844 ( = Gesammelte Werke,
vol. I, 1st Part, Leipzig (Teubner), 1894); (b) Die Ausdehnungslehre,
vollstandig und in strenger Form bearbeitet, Berlin, 1862 ( = Gesammelte
Werke, vol. I, 2nd Part, Leipzig (Teubner), 1896).

20. W. R. Hamilton, Lectures on quaternions, Dublin, 1853.

21. J. J. Sylvester, Collected Mathematical Papers, vol. I, Cambridge, 1904:

No. 25, Addition to the articles..., pp. 145-151 {-Phil. Mag.,
1850).

22. A. Cayley, Collected Mathematical Papers, Cambridge, 1889-1898: (a) Sur

quelques theoremes de la geometrie de position, vol. I, pp. 317-328
(=Crelle's J., vol. XXXI (1846), pp. 213-227); (b) A memoir on the
theory of matrices, vol. II, pp. 475-496 (=Phil. Trans., 1858).

23. K. Weierstrass, Mathematische Werke, vol. II, Berlin, (Mayer und Muller),

666



BIBLIOGRAPHY

1895: Zur Theorie des aus n Haupteinheiten gebildeten complexen
Grossen, pp. 311-332.

24. R. Dedekind, Gesammelte mathematische Werke, 3 vols., Braunschweig

(Vieweg), 1930-32.

25. H. J. Smith, Collected Mathematical Papers, vol. I, Oxford, 1894: On systems

of linear indeterminate equations and congruences, p. 367 (=Phil.
Trans., 1861).

26. L. Kronecker, Vorlesungen fiber die Theorie der Determinanten . . ., Leipzig

(Teubner), 1903.

27. G. Peano, Calcolo geometrico secondo V Ausdehnungstheorie di Grassmann preceduto

dalle operazioni della logica deduttiva, Torino, 1888.

28. G. Ricci and T. Levi-Civita, M6thodes de calcul differentiel absolu et

leurs applications, Math. Ann., vol. LIV (1901), p. 125.

29. E. Gartan, Sur certaines expressions differentielles et le probleme de

Pfaff, Ann. E.N.S. (3), vol. XVI (1899), pp. 239-332 ( = Oeuvres completes,
vol. II l5 Paris (Gauthier-Villars), 1953, pp. 303-396).

30. H. Poincare, Les methodes nowelles de la mecanique celeste, vol. Ill, Paris

(Gauthier-Villars), 1899, Chapter XXII.

31. O. Toeplitz, Ueber die Auflosung unendlichvieler linearer Gleichungen

mit unendlichvielen Unbekannten, Rend. Circ. Mat. Pal., vol. XXVIII
(1909), pp. 88-96.



667



INDEX OF NOTATION



x + y, x.y, xy,xTy,x± y: I, § 1, no. 1.

X T Y, X + Y, XY (X, Y subsets) : I, § 1, no. 1.

X T a, a T X (X a subset, a an element) : I, § 1, no. 1.

«Ta*«' I*- T *°» «4a*&gt; 4-*» - 1 **' «?a*~ ?*» 2*«, n *„n.

n* a :I,§l,no.2.

.jr&lt;-*«»iT.*i :i »§ i » no - 2 -

P&lt;i&lt;9 t = P

*p T # p + 1 T • • • T Xg. I, § 1, no. 3.
T x, ± x n , nx (n eN) : I, § i , no. 3.
T x ij} T # w : I, § 1, no. 5.

q s S 4

2 2 *„, 2 2 x tJ : I, § 1, no. 5.

o^isX^n *W"V Jl&lt;i2 l..&lt; jp *WV l &gt; § *» na 5 '
0, 1:1, §2, no. 1.

Ya&gt; 8 a&gt; Y( fl )&gt; 8 («) : I, § 2, no. 2.

E s (S a subset of a commutative monoid E) : I, § 2, no. 4.

Z, + (addition in Z) : I, § 2, no. 5.

&lt; (order relation on Z) : I, § 2, no. 5.

N* : I, § 2, no. 5.

T (for n e Z) : I, § 2, no. 7.

—#, # — y, x + y — z, x — y — z, x — y + z — t: I, §2, no. 8.

nx (n e Z) : I, § 2, no. 8.

x n (n e Z) : I, § 2, no. 8.

-&gt; -&gt; */y: I&gt; § 2, no. 8.



669



INDEX OF NOTATION

a.x,jc.a,^(aan operator) : I, § 3, no. 1.

a _L #, a ± X, S j_ X (a an operator, S a set of operators) : I, § 3, no. 1.

F : I, § 4, no. 1 .

(G:H), G/H (H a subgroup of G) : I, § 4, no. 4.

x ==y (mod. H), * = y (H) (Ha normal subgroup) : I, § 4, no. 4.

Ker/, Im/ (/a group homomorphism) : I, § 4, no. 5.

FIg^ groups): I, §4, no. 8.

G x x H G 2 :I,§4,no. 8.

II G^G, groups): I, §4, no. 9.

x == y (mod. a), x =y (a) (a, x, y rational integers) : I, § 4, no. 10.

v p (a) (p a prime number, a a rational integer) : I, § 4, no. 10.

Aut(G), Int(G), Int(*) (G a group, x e G) : I, § 5, no. 3.

N (A), N(A) (G a group, A c G) : I, § 5, no. 3.

C G (A), G(A) (G a group, A c G) : I, § 5, no. 3.

E/G, G\E (G a group operating on E) : I, § 5, no. 4.

G\E/H (G, H groups operating on E by commuting actions) : I, § 5, no. 4.

6 n :I,§5,no. 7.

x Xt y (transposition of support {x, y}) : I, § 5, no. 7.

e(a), e a (a a permutation) : I, § 5, no. 7.

2l E ,St n :I,§5,no. 7.

F 4* E -4 G (E, F, G groups) : I, § 6, no. 1.

F x,G/ T (ta homomorphism of G into Aut(F)) : I, § 6, no. 1.

'/(/eF,*eG):I,§6,no. 1.

(/. g) -t(/ # , /) (/,/' in F, g, g' in G) : I, § 6, no. 1.

{x,y), (A, B) (x,y elements, A, B subsets of a group G) : I, § 6, no. 2.

D(G):I,§6,no.2.

C*(G):I, §6, no. 3.

D n (G) : I, § 6, no. 4.

E G (G a group operating on E) : I, § 6, no. 5.

M n (X), M(X) (X a set) : I, § 7, no. 1.

/ («;) (w an element of M(X)) : I, § 7, no. 1.

ww', w.w' (w, w' elements of M(X)) : I, § 7, no. 1.

/ (w) (w a word over X) : I, § 7, no. 2.

ww', w.w' (w, w' words over X) : I, § 7, no. 2.

Mo(X) (X a set) : I, § 7, no. 2.

/ (cr) (ct a decomposition) : I, § 7, no. 3.

* G„ G x * G 2 (G 1} G 2 , G, groups) : I, § 7, no. 3.

&lt;t 15 . . ., r n ; r 1} . . ., r m &gt; (t^ generators, r t relators) : I, § 7, no. 6.

&lt;t 15 . . ., t„; u x = v lt . . ., u m = v m y (x y generators, «„ y t elements of a free

group) : I, § 7, no. 6.
Z«&gt;, N&lt; x &gt;(Xaset):I, § 7, no. 7.

670



INDEX OF NOTATION



0, 1 (elements of a ring) : I, § 8, no. 1.

A (A a ring) : I, § 8, no. 3.

(a) (a an element of A) : I, § 8, no. 6.

2, a K (a K ideals) : I, § 8, no. 6.

x == y (mod a), x = y (a) (a an ideal) : I, § 8, no. 7.

A/ a (a a two-sided ideal) : I, § 8, no. 7.

at) (a, b two-sided ideals) : I, § 8, no. 9.

AfS" 1 ] (S a subset of a ring A) : I, § 8, no. 12.

F p (p a prime number) : I, § 9, no. 1.

Q,: I, §9, no. 4.

Q, + :I,§9,no.4.

|x|, sgn x (x a rational number) : I, § 9, no. 4.

in(G): I, § 4, Exercise 13.

D n : I, § 6, Exercise 4.

Q : I, § 6, Exercise 4.

A « B: I, § 6, Exercise 39.

«(G) : I, § 7, Exercise 39.

4(X) : I, § 7, Exercise 39.

A s , A d (A a ring) : II, § 1, no. 1.

Z**i((*0iei a family of elements of a module of finite support: II, § 1,

no. 1.
Hom A (E, F), Hom(E, F), (E, F, A-modules) : II, § 1, no. 2.
End A (E), End(E), Aut(E), GL(E) (E an A-module) : II, § 1, no. 2.
Hom A (w, v), Hom(tt, v) (u, v linear mappings) : II, § 1, no. 2.
1 E (E a module) : II, § 1, no. 2.

(zero module) : II, § 1, no. 3.

Ker u, Im u, Coim u, Goker u (u a linear mapping) : II, § 1, no. 3.

1 l/ t (/ t : E t -&gt; F t linear mappings) : II, § 1, no. 5.

E t , E p © E p+1 ©• • • © E g ((E t ) t6 i a family of A-modules) : II, § 1, no. 6.

2, £ (f t : E t -&gt; F t linear mappings) : II, § 1, no. 6.

® /»/p ©fp + i ©• • • ©/« (/»: E t -&gt; F t linear mappings) : II, § 1, no. 6.

E (I &gt; (E a module) : II, § 1, no. 6.

© M t ((M t ) leI a family of submodules) : II, § 1, nol 7.

l° n gA(M), long(M) (M an A-module of finite length) : II, § 1, no. 10.
B st (Kronecker symbol) : II, § 1, no. 11.

2j,^ t .t (T a set, E, t elements of a ring) : II, § 1, no. 11.

671



INDEX OF NOTATION

Ann(S), Ann(#) (S a subset of a module, x an element of a module) : II, § 1,

no. 12.
p*(E), E [B] (E an A-module, p: B -&gt; A a ring homomorphism) : II, § 1, no. 13.
P#(«) (p:B-&gt;A a ring homomorphism, u an A-linear mapping): II, § 1,

no. 13.
E* (E a module) : II, § 2, no. 3.
(x, x*y (x an element of a left module E, x* an element of its dual E*) : II,

§ 2, no. 3.
&lt;#*, #&gt; (x an element of a right module E, x* an element of its dual E*) : II,

§2, no. 3.
l u (u a linear or semi-linear mapping) : II, § 2, no. 5.
H (u an isomorphism) : II, § 2, no. 5.
E &lt;g) F, E ® A F (E a right A-module, F a left A-module) : II, § 3, no. 1.

A

x ®y (# e E (a right module), y e F (a left module)) : II, § 3, no. 1.

u &lt;S&gt; v (u, v linear mappings) : II, § 3, no. 2.

u (g&gt; v (u, v semi-linear mappings) : II, § 3, no. 3.

A, (A ring) : II, § 3, no. 4.

«S? 2 (E, F; G) (E, F, G modules over a commutative ring) : II, § 3, no. 5.

vy G x , Qy x K ((G K ) a family of Z-modules, x K e G K for all X) : II, § 3, no. 9.
\y v K (v K : G K -&gt; G£ Z-linear mappings) : II, § 3, no. 9.

X 6 L

C &lt;S&gt; G x , ® ** § *x: H 5 § 3, no. 9.

yyv K (v^ Z-Unear mappings) : II, § 3, no. 9.

E a ® Al E 2 ® Aa E 3 ® • • • ® An _ 2 E B _ a An _ t E n : II, § 3, no. 9.

*i ® *a • • • ® *»: II, § 3, no. 9.

«i ® «2 &lt;8&gt; ■ ' • ^ u n ( u i linear mappings) : II, § 3, no. 9.

&amp; n (E 1} . . ., E n ; G) (Ej, . . ., E n , G modules over a commutative ring): II,

§ 3, no. 9.
Tr(w) (u an endomorphism of a module over a commutative ring) : II, § 4, no.

3.
p*(E), E (B) (E an A-module, p: A -&gt; B a ring homomorphism) : II, § 5, no. 1.
p*(tt), u (B) (p:A-^Ba ring homomorphism, u an A-module homomorphism) :

II, §5, no. 1.
dim K E, dim E, [E: K] (E a vector K-space) : II, § 7, no. 2.
dim A E, dim E (E an A-module any two bases of which are equipotent) : II,

§7, no. 2.
codim E F, codim F (F a vector subspace of a vector space E) : II, § 7, no. 3.
rg(«) (u a linear mapping of vector spaces) : II, § 7, no. 4.
rg(w) (u an element of a tensor product of vector spaces) : II, § 7, no. 8.
dim K E, dim E (E an affine space over a field K) : II, § 9, no. 1.
a + t, t + a (a a point, t a translation of an affine space) : II, § 9, no. 1.

672



INDEX OF NOTATION

b — a {a, b points of an affine space) : II, § 9, no. 1.

2* \x % ((#i)i e i a family of points of an affine space, (\), 6 i a family of scalars,

of finite support, such that 2&lt; \ = 1 or 2&lt; X t = 0) : II, § 9, no. 1.

P(V), A(V) (V a vector space) : II, § 9, no. 5.

P n (K), A n (K) (K a field) : II, § 9, no. 5.

dim K P(V), dim P(V) (V a vector K-space) : II, § 9, no. 5.

£, oo (K a field) : II, § 9, no. 9.

PGL(V), PGL n (K), PGL(n, K) (K a field, V a vector space) : II, § 9, no. 10.

t M {M a matrix) : II, § 10, no. 1.

M ' + M" (M', M" matrices over a commutative group) : II, § 10, no. 2.

f(M ', AT), M'M" {M', M" matrices) : II, § 10, no. 2.

Ey (matrix units) : II, § 10, no. 3.

a(M ), M a (M a matrix, &lt;y a ring homomorphism) : II, § 10, no. 3.

M (#), x (x an element of a finitely generated free module) : II, § 10, no. 4.

M (u) (u a homomorphism of a free module into a free module) : II, § 10, no. 4.

M(x), M(u) (matrices relative to decompositions as direct sums): II, § 10,

no. 5.
M(u) (u a semi-linear mapping) : II, § 10, no. 6.
M n (A), I n l n (A a ring) : II, § 10, no. 7.
GL n (A), GL(n, A) (A a ring) : II, § 10, no. 7.
t X~ 1 (Zan invertible square matrix) : II, § 10, no. 7.
diag(a t )iei 5 diag^, a 2 , ...,a n ): II, § 10, no. 7.

X x &lt;g) X 2 (X l3 X 2 matrices over a commutative ring) : II, § 10, no. 10.
Tr(X) (X a square matrix over a commutative ring) : II, § 10, no. 11.
rg(AT) (X a matrix over a field) : II, § 10, no. 12.
deg(*) (x an element of a graded group) : II, § 11, no. 1.
M(X ) (M a graded module, X an element of the monoid of degrees) : II,

§11, no. 2.
Homgr A (M, N) (M, N graded modules over a graded ring A) : II, § 1 1, no. 6.
Engr A (M), M* 8r (M a graded module) : II, § 11, no. 6.
M:N (M, N modules) : II, § 1, Exercise 24.

, (a, b, c, d points on a projective line) : II, § 9, Exercise 11.

SL(E) (E a vector space) : II, § 10, Exercise 12.

PSL(E) (E a vector space) : II, § 10, Exercise 14.

x -y } X V (multiplication in an algebra) : III, § 1, no. 1.

E° (E an algebra) : III, § 1, no. 1.

Hom A _ alg .(E, F) (E, F A-algebras) : III, § 1, no. 1.

E/b (b a two-sided ideal of an algebra E) : III, § 1, no. 2.

£ (E an algebra) : III, § 1, no. 2.

■*Jc&gt; i'Jbj ""J (E an algebra, c a unit) : III, § 1, no. 3.

673



INDEX OF NOTATION

T(a),N(«):III,§2,no. 3.
m: III, §2, no. 4.

H: III, §2, no. 5.

Lib A (I), Libas A (I), Libasc A (I): III, §2, no. 7.

U((^)iei):HI,§2,no.8.

A[(^),.J,AM l . 1 :III,§2,no.9.

A[(X i ) ieI ]:III,§2,no.9.

A[X 1 ,...,X n ]:III,§2,no.9.

A[X], A[X, Y], A[X, Y, Z] : III, § 2, no. 9.

X v (v a multiindex) : III, § 2, no. 9.

Z, &amp;„ i % s . s (s elements of a monoid) : III, § 2, no. 10.

A[[XJ],«:III,§2,no. 11.

2&lt;x v X v :III,§2, no. 11.

&lt;o(a), g&gt; k (m) (u a formal power series) : III, § 2, no. 11.

® E i} E x ® A E a ® • • • ® a E n , E x ® E 2 ® • • • ® E n (E, A-algebras) : III,

i € I

§4, no. 1.
E®» (E an algebra) : III, § 4, no. 1.

® E, (I an infinite set, E ( algebras) : III, § 4, no. 5.

(&lt;9 «i, ® Ar t (m 4 algebra homomorphisms, *, elements, I infinite) : III, § 4, no. 5.

8 &lt;S) E J} 8 (S) /„ e G® n (Ej, G graded algebras, f x graded algebra homomor-
phisms, e a system of commutation factors) : III, § 4, no. 7.
'&lt;§ E { , E« &lt;g&gt; A F, *G®«, "&lt;§/t,./i *&lt;S&gt;/ 2 , */® n : HI, § 4, no. 7.
(g) n M, T n (M), Tens n (M), 6 Tl(M), T(M), Tens(M),T A (M) (M an A-module) :

III, §5, no. 1.
T(a), T n («) (u a linear mapping) : III, § 5, no. 2.

T}(M), T*(M) (M a module) : III, § 5, no. 6.

&lt;x. T g (z), e? f : Ill, § 5, no. 6.

a*;;? Ill, § 5, no. 6.

rJ:III, §5, no. 6.

S(M), S A (M), Sym(M) : III, § 6, no 1.

3', 3m, 3„: HI, §6, no. 1.

S n (M), S n (u)y S(«) (M a module, u a linear mapping) : III, § 6, nos. 1 and 2.

s.z: III, §6, no. 3.

eP (a a multiindex) : III, § 6, no. 6.

A(M), Aa(M), Alt(M) : III, § 7, no. 1.
3', 8m, K: HI, §7, no. 1.

674



INDEX OF NOTATION

A n (M):III,§7, no. 1.

u A v y x x A # 2 A • • • A x n : III, § 7, no. 1.

A(u), A n (w) (m a linear mapping) : III, § 7, no. 2.

# H (H a subset of (1, «)) : III, § 7, no. 3.

u fo, ...,*„...,*„): Ill, § 7, no. 4.

fl.z: III, §7, no. 4.

A;(M),A^(M):III,§7,no.4.

e 3 : III, §7, no. 8.

p JfK :III,§7,no.8.

det(w) (u an endomorphism) : III, § 8, no. 1.

det^, x 2) . . ., x n ) (Xj vectors in an n-dimensional free A-module) : III, § 8,

no. 1.
det(Z) (X a matrix) : III, § 8, no. 3.
det(5y) 1&lt;1&lt;n , 1&lt;y&lt;n , det(4): HI, § 8, no. 3.

Sll • • • Sin

'.'.'.'. : III, § 8, no. 3.

Snl • • • Z&gt;nn

X s K , X il {X a matrix) : III, § 8, nos 5 and 6.

SL n (A), SL(», A) : III, § 8, no. 9.

p.x (pe A[X], x an element of an A-module) : III, § 8, no. 10.

M tt , M[X] (M an A-module, u an endomorphism) : III, § 8, no. 10.

X„(X) (u an A-module endomorphism) : III, § 8, no. 11.

Tr M/K (a), N M/K (a), Pc M/K (a; X) (A a K-algebra, M an A-module, a g A) : III,

§9, no. 1.
Tr A/K (a), N A/K (a), Pc A/K (a; X) (A a K-algebra, a e A) : III, § 9, no. 3.
Da/k(*i? . . ., x n ) (Xj elements of a K-algebra A) : III, § 9, no. 5.
[") »] 8 &gt; ["&gt; °] ( u &gt; v elements of a graded algebra) : III, § 10, no. 4.
P(D), P(&lt;/ l5 . . ., d n ) (Pa polynomial, dj derivations) : III, § 10, no. 4.
ad 8 (a), ad(a) {a a homogeneous element of a graded algebra) : III, § 10, no. 6.
D K (B, F) (B a K-algebra, F a (B, B)-bimodule) : III, § 10, no. 7.
D A , P (B, F), D A (B, F) : III, § 10, no. 7.
D, (s an endomorphism) : III, § 10, no. 9.

Q K (A), d A i K (x), dx (x an element of a K-algebra A) : III, § 10, no. 11.
D,P, aP/aX, (P a polynomial) : III, § 10, no. 11.
Q(m), £l (u) (u a ring homomorphism) : III, § 10, no. 12.
Q tt (u a K-algebra homomorphism) : III, § 10, no. 12.
M*« (M a graded module) : III, § 11.

u.v, u. m v (u, v symmetric multilinear mappings) : III, § 11, no. 2.
u A v (u, v alternating mutilinear mappings) : III, § 11, no. 2.
T , 6s, 6 A : III, §11, no. 5.

675



INDEX OF NOTATION



u i_ #, i (x) : III, § 11, no. 6.
x j u, i'{x) : III, § 11, no. 6.
x l u, i(u) : III, § 11, no. 7.
u j x, i'(u) : III, § 11, no. 7.
G p (E),G B , p (K):III,§ll,no. 13.
a(x,y, z): III, Appendix, no. 1.
ME: III, § 2, Exercise 13.
E * F : III, § 5, Exercise 6.
R[o] : III, § 6, Exercise 4.
K[X; &lt;r ? d] : III, § 10, Exercise 3.
X: III, §11, Exercise 9.



676



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY



Abelian group: I, § 4, no. 2.

Absolute value of a rational number: I, § 9, no. 4.

Action of one set on another: I, § 3, no. 1.

Action, canonical: I, § 3, no. 1.

Action, distributive: I, § 3, no. 4.

Action, induced: I, § 3, no. 2.

Action, quotient: I, § 3, no. 3.

Action, right, left, derived from a law of composition : I, § 3, no. 1.

Actions which commute: I, § 5, no. 4.

Addition: I, § 1, no. 1.

Addition of rational integers: I, § 2, no. 5.

Additively (law written) : I, § 1, no. 1.

Adjoint of a matrix: III, § 11, Exercise 9.

Adjunction of a unit element (algebra derived by) : III, § 1, no. 2.

Affine function: II, § 9, no. 4.

Affine group: II, § 9, no. 4.

Affine line, plane, hyperplane: II, § 9, no. 3.

Affine mapping: II, § 9, no. 4.

Affine space: II, § 9, no. 1.

Affine subset, linear variety: II, § 9, no. 3.

Affinely free, affinely related family: II, § 9, no. 3.

Affinely independent points: II, § 9, no. 3.

Algebra, A-Algebra: III, § 1, no. 1.

Algebra, alternative: III, Appendix, no. 1.

Algebra, alternating graded: III, § 4, no. 9.

Algebra, anticommutative graded: III, § 4, no. 9.

Algebra, associative: III, § 1, no. 1.

Algebra, Cayley: III, § 2, no. 4.

Algebra, commutative: III, § 1, no. 1.



677



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Algebra derived from an algebra by the adjunction of a unit element: III, § 1,

no. 2.
Algebra, exterior, of a module: III, § 7, no. 1.
Algebra, free: III, § 2, no. 7.
Algebra, free associative: III, § 2, no. 7.
Algebra, free associative and commutative: III, § 2, no. 7.
Algebra, free, of a module: III, § 2, Exercise 13.
Algebra generated by generators subject to relations : III, § 2, no. 8.
Algebra, graded, over a graded ring: III, § 3, no. 1.
Algebra, total, of a monoid: III, § 2, no. 10.
Algebra obtained by extension of scalars: III, § 1, no. 5.
Algebra obtained by restriction of scalars: III, § 1, no. 5.
Algebra of a group, of a magma, of a monoid: III, § 2, no. 6.
Algebra of dual numbers: III, § 2, no. 3.
Algebra of formal power series: III, § 2, no. 11.
Algebra of Hamiltonian quaternions: III, § 2, no. 5.
Algebra of octonians of type (a, (3, y, 8) : III, Appendix, no. 3.
Algebra of quaternions: III, § 2, no. 5.

Algebra of quaternions of type (a, (3, y), of type (a, y) : III, § 2, no. 5.
Algebra, opposite: III, § 1, no. 1.
Algebra, product: III, § 1, no. 4.
Algebra, quadratic: III, § 2, no. 3.
Algebra, quadratic, of type (a, (3) : III, § 2, no. 3.
Algebra, quotient: III, § 1, no. 4.
Algebra, Rees : III, § 6, Exercise 4.
Algebra, restricted, of a monoid: III, § 2, no. 10.
Algebra, symmetric, of a module: III, § 6, no. 1.
Algebra, tensor, of a module: III, § 5, no. 1.
Algebra, unital: III, § 1, no. 1.
Algebra, universal, defined by a generating system related by a family of

relators : III, § 2, no. 8.
Algebra, universal, generated by a set subjected to identities: III, § 2, no. 8.
Algebra, universal unital associative, defined by a generating system related by

a family of relators: III, § 2, no. 8.
Algebras, linearly disjoint: III, § 4, no. 4.
Alternating graded algebra : III, § 4, no. 9.
Alternating group : III, § 5, no. 7.
Alternating multilinear mapping: III, § 7, no. 4.
Alternative algebra: III, Appendix, no. 1.
Amalgamated sum: I, § 7, no. 3.
Annihilated by a scalar (element) : II, § 1, no. 12.
Annihilator, left, right: I, § 8, no. 6.
Annihilator, of a subset, of an element of a module: II, § 1, no. 12.

678



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Antiautomorphism: III, § 1, no. 1.

Anticocommutative graded cogebra: III, § 11, no. 3.

Anticocommutative skew graded bigebra: III, § 11, no. 4.

Anticommutative graded algebra: III, § 4, no. 9.

Anticommutative skew graded bigebra: III, § 11, no. 4.

Antiderivation, K-antiderivation: III, § 10, no. 2.

Antiendomorphism of a ring: II, § 10, no. 6.

Associated (B-module) with an A-module and a ring homomorphism B -^ A:

II, § 1, no. 13.

Associated (faithful module) with a module: II, § 1, no. 12.

Associated (law of action) with an action: I, § 3, no. 1.

Associated (linear mapping) with an affine linear mapping: II, § 9, no. 4.

Associated (vectorspace) with a module over an integral domain: II, §7,

no. 10.
Associated (vector subspace) with a homogeneous element of an exterior

algebra: III, § 7, no. 2.
Associated (vector subspace) with a homogeneous element of a symmetric

algebra: III, § 6, no. 2.
Associated (vector subspace) with a homogeneous element of a tensor algebra:

III, § 5, no. 2.

Associative algebra: III, § 1, no. 1.
Associative algebra, free: III, § 2, no. 7.
Associative and commutative algebra, free: III, § 2, no. 7.
Associative law: I, § 1, no. 3.

Associativity relations in a multiplication table: III, § 1, no. 7.
Associativity theorem: I, § 1, no. 3.
Associator: III, Appendix, no. 1.

Attached (affine space) to a vector space: II, § 9, no. 3.
Augmentation: III, § 10, no. 8.
Automorphism, inner of a group: I, § 5, no. 3.
• Automorphism, inner, of a ring: I, § 8, no. 4.
Automorphism with no fixed point: I, § 6, Exercise 23.

Barycentre of m points, barycentre of a family of weighted points: II, §9,

no. 2.
Barycentric coordinate: II, § 9, no. 3.
Bases dual to one another: II, § 2, no. 7.
Basic family in a group : I, § 7, no. 6.
Basis dual of a basis of a module: II, § 2, no. 6.
Basis, Hamel: II, § 7, no. 1.
Basis of a module: II, § 1, no. 11.
Basis of an algebra: III, § 1, no. 7.
Basis of T£(M) associated with a basis of M: III, § 5, no. 6.

679



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Basis of type (a, (3) of a quadratic algebra: III, § 2, no. 3.

Basis of type (a, £5, y), of type (a, y), of a quaternion algebra: III, § 2, no. 5.

Basis, projective: II, § 9, Exercise 10.

Biadditive, Z-bilinear mapping: II, § 3, no. 1.

Bicentralizer : I, § 1, no. 5.

Bicentralizer of a subalgebra: III, § 1, no. 2.

Bicyclic group: I, § 6, Exercise 26.

Bidual of a module: II, § 2, no. 7.

Bigebra, anticommutative, anticocommutative, skew graded: III, § 11, no. 4.

Bigebra, cocommutative, commutative, graded: III, § 11, no. 4.

Bigebra, graded bigebra, skew graded bigebra, III, § 11, no. 4.

Bigebra of a monoid: III, § 11, no. 4.

Bigraded group, ring, module: II, § 11, no. 2.

Bigraduation : II, § 11, no. 1.

Bilinear mapping: II, § 3, no. 5.

Bimodule, (A, B)-bimodule: II, § 1, no. 14.

Bimodule over algebras: III, § 4, no. 3.

Binomial formula: I, § 8, no. 2.

Block product of matrices: II, § 10, no. 5.

Boolean ring: I, § 9, Exercise 8.

Bordered matrix: II, § 10, no. 1.

Bracket, e-bracket of two derivations: III, § 10, no. 4.

Cancellable, left, right, cancellable, element: I, § 2, no 2.

Cartan-Brauer-Hua Theorem: I, § 9, Exercise 18.

Cayley algebra: III, § 2, no. 4.

Gayley extension of an algebra: III, § 2, no. 5.

Gayley-Hamilton theorem: III, § 8, no. 11.

Cayley norm, trace: III, § 2, no. 4.

Cayley octonians: III, Appendix, no. 3.

Central element: I, § 1, no. 5.

Central extension: I, § 6, no. 1.

Central homothety: II, § 1, no. 2.

Central ring homomorphism: II, § 5, no. 3.

Central series, lower: I, § 6, no. 3.

Centralizer: I, § 5, no. 3.

Centralizer of a subalgebra of an associative algebra: III, § 1, no. 2.

Centralizer of a subset: I, § 1, no. 5.

Centralizer of a subset of a field: II, § 7, no. 7.

Centralizer subalgebra: III, § 1, no. 2.

Centralizing element: I, § 5, no. 3.

Centralizing subset: I, § 5, no. 3.

Centre: I, § 1, no. 5.

680



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Centre of an algebra: III, § 1, no. 2.

Centre of a projective linear mapping: II, § 9, no. 10.

Change of coordinates, formulae of: II, § 10, no. 8.

Characteristic of a field : I, § 9, Exercise 4.

Characteristic polynomial of a matrix: III, § 8, no. 11.

Characteristic subgroup : I, § 5, no. 3.

Class, conjugacy: I, § 5, no. 4.

Class, nilpotency, of a group: I, § 6, no. 3.

Class, solvability, of a group: I, § 6, no. 4.

Coassociative cogebra: III, § 11, no. 2.

Cocommutative bigebra: III, § 11, no. 4.

Cocommutative cogebra: III, § 11, no. 2.

Codiagonal mapping: II, § 1, no. 6.

Codimension of an affine linear variety: II, § 9, no. 3.

Codimension of a vector subspace : II, § 7, no. 3.

Coefficients of a formal power series: III, § 2, no. 11.

Coefficients of a linear combination: II, § 1, no. 1.

Coefficients of a polynomial: III, § 2, no. 9.

Coefficients of a system of linear equations: II, § 2, no. 8.

Cofactor of an element of a square matrix: III, § 8, no. 6.

Cogebra, A-cogebra: III, § 11, no. 1.

Cogebra, anticocommutative graded: III, § 11, no. 3.

Cogebra, coassociative: III, § 11, no. 2.

Cogebra, cocommutative: III, § 11, no. 2.

Cogebra, counital: III, § 11, no. 2.

Cogebra, graded: III, § 11, no. 1.

Cogebra, opposite: III, § 11, no. 1.

Coimage of a linear mapping: II, § 1, no. 3.

Coincidence group : I, § 4, no. 8.

Cokernel of a linear mapping: II, § 1, no. 3.

Column of a matrix: II, § 10, no. 1.

Combination, linear: II, § 2, no. 5.

Combinations, formal linear (module of) : II, § 1, no. 11.

Commutation factor: III, § 10, no. 1.

Commutative algebra: III, § 1, no. 1.

Commutative field: I, § 9, no. 1.

Commutative graded bigebra: III, § 11, no. 4.

Commutative group, free, over X: I, § 7, no. 5.

Commutative group with operators: I, § 4, no. 2.

Commutative law: I, § 1, no. 5.

Commutative magma: I, § 1, no. 5.

Commutative monoid, free, over X : I, § 7, no. 7.

Commutative ring: I, § 8, no. 1.



681



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Commutativity relations in a multiplication table: III, § 1, no. 7.

Commutativity theorem: I, § 1, no. 5.

Commutator group: I, § 6, no. 2.

Commutator of two elements: I, § 6, no. 2.

Commute, actions which: I § 5, no. 4.

Commute, elements which: I, § 1, no. 5.

Compatible (equivalence relation) with a law of composition : I, § 1, no. 6.

Compatible (equivalence relation) with an action : I, § 3, no. 3.

Compatible (graduation) with a coproduct: III, § 11, no. 1.

Compatible (graduation) with an algebra structure: III, § 3, no. 1.

Compatible (graduation) with a ring, module, structure: II, § 11, no. 2.

Compatible law of composition and equivalence relation: I, § 1, no. 6.

Compatible, left, right (equivalence relation), with a law of composition : I,

§ 3, no. 3.
Compatible (mapping) with an action: I, § 3, no. 1.
Compatible (mapping) with the operation of a monoid: I, § 5, no. 1.
Compatible module or multimodule structure: II, § 1, no. 14.
Complementary minors: III, § 8, no. 6.

Component, homogeneous, of an element in a graded group: II, § 11, no. 1.
Component of an element in a direct sum: II, § 1, no. 8.
Component of an element with respect to a basis: II, § 1, no. 11.
Component, S-connected: I, § 7, Exercise 18.
Component submodule of a direct sum: II, § 1, no. 6.
Composition in M(X) : I, § 7, no. 1.
Composition, law of: I, § 1, no. 1.

Composition of a family with finite support: I, § 2, no. 1.
Composition of an ordered sequence: I, § 1, no. 2.
Composition of the empty family: I, § 2, no. 1.
Composition of words: I, § 7, no. 2.
Composition series : I, § 4, no. 7.
Condition, maximal (resp. minimal) (set of subgroups satisfying the) : I, § 4,

Exercise 15.
Congruence modulo a rational integer: I, § 4, no. 10.
Congruent (elements) modulo an ideal: I, § 8, no. 7.
Conjugacy class in a group : I, § 5, no. 4.
Conjugate elements in a group : I, § 5, no. 4.
Conjugate elements under the operation of a group: I, § 5, no. 4.
Conjugate subsets in a group: I, § 5, no. 4.
Conjugation, conjugate in a Cayley algebra: III, § 2, no. 4.
Conjugation, conjugate in a quadratic algebra: III, § 2, no. 3.
Constants of structure of an algebra with respect to a basis: III, § 1, no. 7.
Contraction of two indices in a mixed tensor: III, § 5, no. 6.
Contragredient of an invertible square matrix: II, § 10, no. 7.

682



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Contragradient of an isomorphism: II, § 2, no. 5.

Contravariant tensor: III, § 5, no. 6.

Coordinate, barycentric: II, § 9, no. 3.

Coordinate form: II, § 2, no. 6.

Coordinate of an element with respect to a basis: II, § 1, no. 11.

Coordinates, homogeneous (system of), of a point in a projective space: II,

§ 9, no. 6.
Coordinates of a tensor over M with respect to a basis of M: III, § 5, no. 6.
Coproduct: III, § 11, no. 1.

Coset (right, left) modulo a subgroup : I, § 4, no. 4.
Cotranspose of an endomorphism: III, § 8, no. 6.
Counital cogebra: III, § 11, no. 2.
Counit:III, §11, no. 2.
Covariant tensor: III, § 5, no. 6.
Cramer formulae, system: III, § 8, no 7.
Cross-ratio: II, §9, Exercise 11.
Crossed homomorphism: I, § 6, Exercise 7.
Crossed product: III, § 2, Exercise 11.
Cyclic group: I, § 4, no. 10.
Cycle of a permutation : I, § 5, no. 7.

Decomposable p-vector: III, § 11, no. 13.

Decomposition, direct, of a ring: I, § 8, no. 11.

Decomposition, reduced decomposition of an element in an amalgamated sum

of monoids: I, § 7, no. 3.
Defined (group) by generators and relations : I, § 7, no. 6.
Defined (monoid) by generators and relations : I, § 7, no. 2.
Degree of a homogeneous element in a graded group: II, § 1 1, no. 1.
Degree of a polynomial with respect to the indeterminates X y such that / e J:

III, § 2, no. 9.
Degree, total degree, of a monomial: III, § 2, no. 9.
Degree, total degree, of an element of a free algebra, of a free associative

algebra: III, §2, no. 7.
Degree, total degree, of a polynomial: III, § 2, no. 9.
Denominator: I, § 2, no. 4.
6-derivation, inner: III, § 10, no. 6.
Derivation, K-derivation : III, § 10, no. 2.

(K, s) -derivation of degree 8, s-derivation of degree 8: III, § 10, no. 2.
s-derivation of a graded algebra, e-derivation of a ring: III, § 10, no. 2.
Derivation of a ring A into a ring B: III, § 10, no. 2.
Derivative, partial: III, § 10, no. 11.
Derived (element) from an element of the free algebra by substituting elements

for the indeterminates : III, § 2, no. 8.

683



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Derived (element) from an element of the free associative algebra by sub-
stituting elements for the indeterminates: III, § 2, no. 8.
Derived group of a group : I, § 6, no. 2.

Derived (left action, right action) from a law of composition : I, § 3, no. 1.
Derived series of a group : I, § 6, no. 4.
Determinant, Cauchy: III, § 8, Exercise 5.
Determinant of a matrix: III, § 8, no. 3.
Determinant of an endomorphism: III, § 8, no. 1.
Determinant of a sequence of vectors: III, § 8, no. 1.
Determinant, Vandermonde: III, § 8, no. 6.
Diagonal elements of a square matrix: II, § 10, no. 7.
Diagonal matrix of matrices: II, § 10, no. 7.
Diagonal of a square matrix, diagonal matrix: II, § 10, no. 7.
Diagram, exact: II, § 1, no. 4.
Differences, group of: I, § 2, no. 4.
Differences, monoid of: I, § 2, no. 4.
K-differential: III, § 10, no. 11.
Differential of an element: III, § 10, no. 11.
Dihedral group: I, § 6, Exercise 4.
Dilatation: II, § 10, Exercise 11.
Dimension of a free module: II, § 7, no. 2.
Dimension of an affine linear variety: II, § 9, no. 3.
Dimension of an affine space: II, § 9, no. 1.
Dimension of a projective space: II, § 9, no. 5.
Dimension of a vector space: II, § 7, no. 2.
Dimorphism: II, § 1, no. 13.
Direct decomposition of a ring: I, § 8, no. 11.
Direct factor: I, § 4, no. 9.
Direct limit: see Limit, direct.
Direct product: I, § 4, no. 9.
Direct product, internal: I, § 4, no. 9.
Direct sum: I, § 4, no. 9.
Direct system: see System direct.
Direction of an affine linear variety: II, § 9, no. 3.
Direction parameters of an affine line: II, § 9, no. 3.
Direction vector of an affine line: II, § 9, no. 3.
Discriminant ideal of an algebra: III, § 9, no. 5.
Discriminant of a finite sequence in an algebra: III, § 9, no. 5.
Distributive action: I, § 3, no. 4.

Distributive, left distributive, right distributive, law: I, § 3, no. 4.
Distributive (mapping) with respect to an index: I, § 3, no. 4.
Distributivity of one law of composition with respect to another: I, § 3, no. 5.
Divisor, left, right: I, § 8, no. 1.

684



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Divisor of zero, left, right: I, § 8, no. 1.

Domain, integral, domain of integrity: I, § 9, no. 2.

Double coset with respect to two subgroups : I, § 5, no. 4.

Dual bases: II, § 2, nos. 6 and 7.

Dual, graded, of a graded module: II, § 11, no. 6.

Dual numbers, algebra of: III, § 2, no. 3.

Dual of a module : II, § 2, no. 3.

Element, central: I, § 1, no. 5.

Element centralizing a subset: I, § 5, no. 3.

Element derived from an element of the free algebra by substituting elements

for indeterminates: III, § 2, no. 8.
Element derived from an element of the free associative algebra by substituting

elements for indeterminates: III, § 2, no. 8.
Element, free, of a module: II, § 1, no. 11.
Element, homogeneous (homogeneous of degree n), of a graded group: II,

§11, no. 1.
Element, identity : I, § 2, no. 1 .
Element invariant under an operator: I, § 3, no. 2.
Element, isobaric, of a graded group: II, § 11, no. 1.
Element, left cancellable, right cancellable, cancellable : I, § 2, no. 2.
Element, left invertible, right invertible, invertible : I, § 2, no. 3.
Element, left regular, right regular, regular: I, § 2, no. 2.
Element normalizing a subset: i, § 5, no. 3.
Element, /&gt;-regular: I, § 6, Exercise 28.
Element, ^-unipotent: I, § 6, Exercise 28.
Element, primitive, in a free group: I, § 7, Exercise 26.
Element, primitive, of a graded bigebra: III, § 11, no. 8.
Element resulting from substituting elements for indeterminates in a free

group: I, §7, no. 5.
Element, ^-neighbouring: I, § 7, Exercise 18.
Element, torsion, of a module: II, § 7, no. 10.
Element, unit: I, § 2, no. 1.
Element, unit, of an algebra: III, § 1, no. 1.
Element, zero: I, § 2, no. 1.

Elements congruent modulo an ideal: I, § 8, no. 7.
Elements, conjugate, in a group: I, § 5, no. 4.
Elements, conjugate, under the operation of a group: I, § 5, no. 4.
Elements, diagonal, of a square matrix: II, § 10, no. 7.
Elements, linearly dependent (linearly independent) in a module: II, § 1,

no. 11.
Elements, orthogonal : II, § 2, no. 4.
Elements, permutable, elements which commute: I, § 1, no. 5.

685



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Empty matrix: II, § 10, no. 1.

Endomorphism: I, § 1, no. 1.

Endomorphism of a module: II, § 1, no. 2.

Endomorphism of a ring: I, § 8, no. 4.

Endomorphism, unimodular: III, § 8, no. 1.

Endomorphisms, equivalent, similar: III, § 8, Exercise 26.

Ends, number of ends: I, § 7, Exercise 37.

Envelope, injective, of a module: II, § 2, no. 1.

Equation, linear, homogeneous linear equation, homogeneous linear equation

associated with a linear equation: II, § 2, no. 8.
Equation of a hyperplane: II, § 7, no. 5.
Equation, scalar linear: II, § 2, no. 8.
Equations, linear (system of) : II, § 2, no. 8.
Equations (system of) of a vector subspace: II, § 7, no. 5.
Equivalent composition series : I, § 4, no. 7.
Equivalent endomorphisms: III, § 8, Exercise 26.
Equivalent matrices: II, § 10, no. 9.
Even permutation: I, § 5, no. 7.
Exact diagram: II, § 1, no. 4.
Exact sequence: II, § 1, no. 4.
Expansion by a column: III, § 8, no. 6.
Expansion by a row: III, § 8, no. 6.
Expansion, Laplace: III, § 8, no. 6.
Extension, Cayley, of an algebra: III, § 2, no. 5.
Extension, central: I, § 6, no. 1.
Extension, essential, of a module: II, § 2, Exercise 15.
Extension of laws of operation: I, § 5, no. 1.
Extension of one group by another: I, § 6, no. 1.
Extension of one module by another: II, § 1, no. 4.
Extension of scalars (module obtained by) : II, § 5, no. 1 .
Extension of scalars (algebra obtained by) : III, § 1, no. 5.
Extension, trivial: I, § 6, no. 1.
Extension, trivial, of a module: II, § 1, no. 9.
Exterior algebra of a module: III, § 7, no. 1.
Exterior power, p-th, of an endomorphism: III, § 7, no. 4.
Exterior power, p-th, of a matrix: III, § 8, no. 5.
Exterior power, p-th, of a module: III, § 7, no. 4.
Exterior product of a/&gt;-vector and a ^-vector: III, § 7, no. 1.
External law of composition : I, § 3, no. 1 .

Factor, direct, of a group : I, § 4, no. 9.
Factor, direct, of a module: II, § 1, no. 9.
Factor of a product: I, § 1, no. 2.

686



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Factors, system of: III, § 2, Exercise 11.

Faithfully (monoid operating) : I, § 5, no. 1.

Faithful module: III, § 1, no. 12.

Family, affinely free, affinely related, of points in an affine space: II, §9,

no. 3.
Family, basic, free, generating, in a group : I, § 7, no. 6.
Family, free, related, of elements of a module: II, § 1, no. 11.
Family, generating, of an algebra: III, § 1, no. 2.
Family, orthogonal, of projectors: II, § 1, no. 8.
Family, projectively free, projectively related, of points in a projective space:

II, §9, no. 7.
Fibre product: I, § 4, no. 8.
Field: I, §9, no. 1.

Field, commutative, skew field: I, § 9, no. 1.
Field of fractions of an integral domain: I, § 9, no. 2.
Field of left fractions: I, § 9, Exercise 15.
Field of rational numbers: I, § 9, no. 4.
Field, projective: II, § 9, no. 9.
Finer composition series: I, § 4, no. 7.
Finite group: I, § 4, no. 1.
Finitely generated group: I, § 7, Exercise 16.
Finitely generated module: II, § 1, no. 7.
Fixer of a subset of a set: I, § 5, no. 2.

Fixing a subset of a set (operator, set of operators) : I, § 5, no. 2.
Form, canonical bilinear: II, § 2, no. 3.
Form, coordinate: II, § 2, no. 6.
Form, linear: II, § 2, no. 3.
Form, rc-linear: II, § 3, no. 9.
n-form: III, § 11, no. 7.
Formula, binomial: I, § 8, no. 2.
Formula, Leibniz: III, § 10, no. 4.
Formulae, Cramer's: III, §8, no. 7.
Formulae of change of coordinates: II, § 10, no. 8.
Formulae, transitivity, of norms and traces: III, § 9, no. 4.
Fractions (field of) of an integral domain: I, § 9, no. 2.
Fractions, group of, of a monoid: I, § 2, no. 4.
Fractions, monoid of, with denominators in S : I, § 2, no. 4.
Fractions, ring of, with denominators in S: I, § 8, no. 12.
Fractions, total ring of: I, § 8, no. 12.
Free algebra, associative algebra, associative and commutative algebra: III,

§2, no. 7.
Free algebra of a module: III, § 2, Exercise 13.
Free commutative group: I, § 7, no. 5.

687



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Free commutative monoid: I, § 7, no. 7.

Free element, family, module, subset, system: II, § 1, no. 1 1, and (by an abuse

of language) II, § 9, no. 7.
Free family in a group : I, § 7, no. 6.
Free group: I, § 7, no. 5.
Free magma: I, § 7, no. 1.
Free monoid : I, § 7, no. 2.
Free product of algebras: III, § 5, Exercise 6.
Free product of groups: I, § 7, no. 3.
Free vector in an affine space: II, § 9, no. 1.
Freely, group operating: I, § 5, no. 4.
Function, linearly affine, affine function: II, § 9, no. 4.

Generated by a family of ordered pairs (equivalent relation): I, § 1,

no. 6.
Generated by a subset (ideal) : I, § 8, no. 6, and III, § 1, no. 2.
Generated by a subset (stable subgroup) : I, § 4, no. 3.
Generated by a subset (stable subset) : I, § 1, no. 4.
Generated by a subset (subalgebra) : III, § 1, no. 2.
Generated by a subset (subfield) : I, § 9, no. 1.
Generated by a subset (submagma) : I, § 1, no. 4.
Generated by a subset (subring) : I, § 8, no. 5.
Generated by a subset (unital submagma, submonoid) : I, § 2, no. 1.
Generating family of a group: I, § 7, no. 6.
Generating family of an algebra: III, § 1, no. 2.
Generating set, system, of a field : I, § 9, no. 1 .
Generating set, system, of a magma: I, § 1, no. 4.
Generating set, system, of a module: II, § 1, no. 7.
Generating set, system, of an ideal: I, § 8, no. 6.
Generating set, system, of a ring: I, § 8, no. 5.
Generating set, system, of a stable subgroup: I, § 4, no. 3.
Generating set, system, of a stable subset: I, § 1, no. 4.
Generating set, system, of a unital submagma, of a submonoid: I, § 2, no. 1.
Generators of a presentation: I, § 7, no. 6.
Graded algebra over a graded ring: III, § 3, no. 1.
Graded bigebra: III, § 11, no. 4.
Graded bigebra, skew: III, § 11, no. 4.
Graded cogebra: III, § 11, no. 1.
Graded group, module, ring: II, § 11, nos. 1 and 2.
Graded homomorphism: II, § 11, no. 2.
Graded subalgebra: III, § 3, no. 2.
Graded subring, submodule, ideal: II, § 11, no. 3.
Graded tensor product of type A : III, § 4, no. 8.

688



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY



Graduation compatible with a coproduct: III, § 11, no. 1.

Graduation compatible with an algebra structure: III, § 3, no. 1.

Graduation induced, quotient graduation: II, § 11, no. 3.

Graduation of type A: II, § 11, no. 1.

Graduation, partial, total graduation: II, § 11, nos. 1 and 2.

Graduation, trivial: II, § 11, no. 1.

Grassmannian: III, § 11, no. 13.

Grassmann relations: III, § 11, no. 13.

Greatest common divisor (g.c.d.) of two integers : I, § 8, no. 11.

Group : I, § 2, no. 3.

Group, additive, of a ring: I, § 8, no. 1.

Group, affine: I, § 9, no. 4.

Group, alternating: I, § 5, no. 7.

Group, bicyclic: I, § 6, Exercise 26.

Group, bigraded: II, § 11, no. 2.

Group, concidence, of two homomorphisms : I, § 4, no. 8.

Group commutator: I, § 6, no. 2.

Group, cyclic: I, § 4, no. 10.

Group denned by generators and relations : I, § 7, no. 6.

Group, derived: I, § 6, no. 2.

Group, dihedral : I, § 6, Exercise 4.

Group, finite, infinite group: I, § 4, no. 1.

Group, finitely generated: I, § 7, Exercise 16.

Group, finitely presented: I, § 7, Exercise 16.

Group, free commutative, over a set: I, § 7, no. 7 and II, § 1, no. 11.

Group, free, over a set: I, § 7, no. 5.

Group, graded: II, § 11, no. 1.

Group, linear: II, § 2, no. 6.

Group, minimal simple: I, § 6, Exercise 27.

Group, monogenous: I, § 4, no. 10.

Group, multiplicative, of a ring: I, § 8, no. 1.

Group, nilpotent, nilpotent group of class n: I, § 6, no. 3.

Group of differences, group of fractions : I, § 2, no. 4.

Group of exponential type: I, § 7, Exercise 39.

Group operating faithfully: I, § 5, no. 1.

Group operating freely: I, § 5, no. 4.

Group operating simply transitively: I, § 5, no. 6.

Group operating transitively: I, § 5, no. 5.

/&gt;-group: I, §6, no. 5.

Group, projective: II, § 9, no. 10.

Group, residually finite: I, § 5, Exercise 5.

Group, solvable, solvable group of class n: I, § 6, no. 4.

Group, special linear: III, § 8, no. 9.



689



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Group, supersolvable: I, § 6, Exercise 26.

Group, symmetric: I, § 4, no. 1.

Group, unimodular: III, § 8, no. 9.

Group with operators, Abelian, commutative: I, § 4, no. 2.

Group with operators: I, § 4, no. 2.

Group with operators, product: I, § 4, no. 8.

Group with operators, product (or internal product), of a family of quotient

groups : I, § 4, no. 8.
Group with operators, quotient: I, § 4, no. 4.
Group with operators, simple: I, § 4, no. 4.
Groupoid : I, § 4, Exercise 23.

Hall's Theorem: I, § 6, Exercise 10.

Hamel basis: II, § 7, no. 1.

Hamiltonian quaternions: III, § 2, no. 5.

Homogeneous element in a graded group: II, § 11, no. 1.

Homogeneous G-set: I, § 5, no. 5.

Homogeneous linear equation, linear system: II, § 2, no. 8.

Homogeneous subset of degree p in a formal power series: III, § 2, no. 11.

Homogeneous subset of degree p with respect to certain indeterminates in a

formal power series: III, § 2, no. 11.
Homomorphism, algebra: III, § 1, no. 1.
Homomorphism, A-module, A-homomorphism : II, § 1, no. 2.
Homomorphism, central ring: II, § 5, no. 3.
Homomorphism, crossed: I, § 6, Exercise 7.
Homomorphism, essential: II, § 2, Exercise 15.
Homomorphism for two laws of composition : I, § 1, no. 1.
Homomorphism, graded: II, § 11, no. 2.
Homomorphism, graded algebra: III, § 3, no. 1.
Homomorphism, group: I, § 4, no. 1.
Homomorphism, monoid : I, § 2, no. 1 .
Homomorphism, M-set: I, § 5, no. 1.
Homomorphism, multimodule: II, § 1, no. 14.
Homomorphism of groups with operators: I, § 4, no. 2.
&lt;j&gt;-homomorphism: I, § 3, no. 1.
Homomorphism, projection: I, §4, no. 8.
Homomorphism, ring: I, § 8, no. 4.
Homomorphism, trivial: I, § 2, no. 1.
Homomorphism, unital: I, § 2, no. 1.
Homomorphism, unital algebra: III, § 1, no. 1.
Homothety: I, § 4, no. 2 and II, § 1, no. 1.
Homothety, central: II, § 1, no. 2 and III, § 9, Exercise 6.
Hyperplane, affine: II, § 9, no. 3.

690



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Hyperplane at infinity: II, § 9, no. 8.

Hyperplane passing through in a vector space : II, § 7, no. 3.

Hyperplane, projective: II, § 9, no. 7.

Hyperplane, projective, taken as hyperplane at infinity: II, § 9, no. 10.

Ideal, discriminant: III, § 9, no. 5.
Ideal, graded: II, § 11, no. 3 and III, § 3, no. 2.
Ideal, irreducible two-sided: I, § 8, Exercise 11.
Ideal, left, right ideal, two-sided ideal in an algebra: III, § 1, no. 2.
Ideal, left, right ideal, two-sided ideal in a ring: I, § 8, no. 6.
Ideal, maximal: I, § 8, no. 6.
Ideal, prime: I, § 9, no. 3.
Ideal, principal: I, § 8, no. 6.
Ideal of relators: III, § 2, no. 8.
Ideal, zero: I, § 8, no. 6.
Idempotent: I, § 1, no. 4.

Identities, Jacobi, between minors of a determinant: III, § 11, Exercise 9.
Identities, polynomials : III, § 2, no. 9.
Identity element: I, § 2, no. 1.
Identity, Jacobi: III, § 10, no. 6.
Identity, Redei: III, § 8, Exercise 25.

Image (inverse image) of a projective linear variety under a projective map-
ping: II, § 9, no. 10.
Image of a homomorphism: II, § 1, no. 3.

Indeterminate, ^determinate of index i: I, § 7, no. 5 and III, § 2, no. 7.
Index of a subgroup: I, § 4, no. 4.
Induced action: I, § 3, no. 2.
Induced graduation: II, § 11, no. 3.
Induced K'-structure: II, § 8, no. 1.
Induced law: I, § 1, no. 4.
Infinity, hyperplane at: II, § 9, no. 8.
Infinity, points at: II, § 9, no. 8.
Inner automorphism of a group : I, § 5, no. 3.
Inner automorphism of a ring: I, § 8, no. 4.
Inner product, left, right: III, § 11, nos. 6 and 7.

Integer, negative, positive, strictly negative, strictly positive: I, § 2, no. 5.
Integer, rational : I, § 2, no. 5.

Integers, rational, modulo a (ring of) : I, § 8, no. 11.
Integers, relatively prime: I, § 8, no. 11.
Integral domain: I, § 9, no. 2.
Integrity, domain of: I, § 9, no. 2.
Internal direct product, restricted sum: I, § 4, no. 9.
Invariant element: I, § 5, no. 2.

691



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Invariant subgroup, stable subgroup : I, § 4, no. 4.

Inverse, left inverse, right inverse, element: I, § 2, no. 3.

Inverse, left, right inverse, of a linear mapping: II, § 1, no. 9.

Inverse limit: see Limit, inverse.

Inverse system: see System, inverse.

Inversion in a bigebra: III, §11, Exercise 4.

Inversion of a permutation: I, § 5, no. 7.

Invertible, left invertible, right invertible, element: I, § 2, no. 3.

Invertible, left, right invertible, linear mapping: II, § 1, no. 9.

Invertible square matrix: II, § 10, no. 7.

Irreducible ideal : I, § 8, Exercise 1 1 .

Isobaric element: II, § 11, no. 1.

Isomorphic magmas: I, § 1, no. 1.

Isomorphism, magma: I, § 1, no. 1.

Jacobi identity: III, § 10, no. 6.
Jordan-Holder series: I, § 4, no. 7.
Jordan-Holder Theorem: I, § 4, no. 7.
Juxtaposition: I, § 7, no. 2.

Kernel of a group homomorphism: I, § 4, no. 5.
Kernel of a linear mapping: II, § 1, no. 3.
Kronecker symbol: II, § 1, no. 11.
KrulFs Theorem: I, § 8, no. 6.

Laplace expansion: III, § 8, no. 6.

Law and equivalence relation, compatible: I, § 1, no. 6.

Law, associative: I, § 1, no. 3.

Law, commutative: I, § 1, no. 5.

Law, group: I, § 4, no. 1.

Law, induced: I, § 1, no. 4.

Law, left distributive, right distributive, distributive with respect to another:

I, § 3, nos. 4 and 5.
Law not everywhere defined: I, § 1, no. 1.
Law of composition : I, § 1, no. 1.

Law of left, right, operation of a monoid on a set: I, § 5, no. 1.
Law of right, left action associated with an action: I, § 3, no. 1.
Law, opposite: I, § 1, no. 1.
Law, quotient: I, § 1, no. 6.

Law written additively, multiplicatively: I, § 1, no. 1.
Least common multiple (l.c.m.) of two integers: I, § 8, no. 11.
Leibniz formula: III, § 10, no. 4.
Lemma, Zassenhaus's : I, § 4, no. 7.

692



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY



Length of a decomposition in an amalgamated sum: I, § 7, no. 3.

Length of a group : I, § 4, no. 7.

Length of a module: II, § 1, no. 10.

Length of an element in a free group: I, § 7, Exercise 19.

Length of an element in a free magma: I, § 7, no. 1.

Length of a word: I, § 7, no. 2.

Limit, direct, of A^-algebras: III, § 1, no. 6.

Limit, direct, of A a -modules: II, § 6, no. 2.

Limit, direct, of actions: I, § 10, no. 4.

Limit, direct, of graded algebras: III, § 3, no. 3.

Limit, direct, of groups, of groups with operators, of monoids: I, § 10, no. 3.

Limit, direct, of magmas: I, § 10, no. 3.

Limit, direct, of rings: I, § 10, no. 3.

Limit, inverse, of A^-algebras: III, § 1, no. 6.

Limit, inverse, of A^-modules : II, § 6, no. 1.

Limit, inverse, of groups, of groups with operators, of monoids: I, § 10, no. 1.

Limit, inverse, of magmas: I, § 10, no. 1.

Limit, inverse, of rings: I, § 10, no. 1.

Line, affine: II, § 9, nos. 1 and 3.

Line (passing through 0) in a vector space: II, § 7, no. 3.

Line, projective: II, § 9, no. 5.

Linear equation, system: II, § 2, no. 8.

Linear equation, system, homogeneous: II, § 2, no. 8.

Linear form: II, § 2, no. 3.

Linear group: II, § 2, no. 6.

Linear group, special: III, § 8, no. 9.

Linear mapping: II, § 1, no. 2.

Linear mapping, function, affine: II, § 9, no. 4.

Linear mapping, projective: II, § 9, no. 10.

Linear problem: II, § 2, no. 8.

Linear variety: II, § 9, nos. 3, 7 and 11.

Linear variety, affine: II, § 9, no. 3.

Linear variety, projective: II, § 9, nos. 7 and 11.

Linearly dependent, linear independent, elements: II, § 1, no. 11.

Linearly disjoint subalgebras: III, § 4, no. 4.

Linearity, principle of extension by: II, § 1, no. 7.

Magma: I, § 1, no. 1.

Magma, associative: I, § 1, no. 3.

Magma, commutative: I, § 1, no. 5.

Magma, defined by generators and relations: I, § 7, no. 1.

Magma, free, over a set: I, § 7, no. 1.

Magma of mappings into a magma: I, § 1, no. 1.



693



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Magma, opposite: I, § 1, no. 1.

Magma, product: I, § 1, no. 1.

Magma, quotient: I, § 1, no. 6.

Magma, unital: I, § 2, no. 1.

Magmas, isomorphic: I, § 1, no. 1.

Mapping, afnne linear, affine: II, § 9, no. 4.

Mapping, alternating multilinear: III, § 7, no. 4.

Mapping, biadditive, Z-bilinear: II, § 3, no. 1.

Mapping, C-bilinear: II, § 3, no. 5.

Mapping compatible with an action: I, § 3, no. 1.

Mapping compatible with the operation of a monoid: I, § 5, no. 1.

Mapping distributive with respect to a variable: I, § 3, no. 4.

Mapping, linear, A-linear: II, § 1, no. 2.

Mapping, linear, A S (T)-&gt;E determined by a mapping T-&gt;E: II, § 1,

no. 11.
Mapping, linear, associated with an afline mapping: II, § 9, no. 4.
Mapping, multiadditive, Z-multilinear: II, § 3, no. 9.
Mapping, C-multilinear: II, § 3, no. 9.
Mapping, orbital: I, § 5, no. 4.

Mapping, projective linear, projective: II, § 9, no. 10.
Mapping, right invertible linear, left invertible linear: II, § 1, no. 9.
Mapping, semi-linear: II, § 1, no. 13.
Mapping, symmetric multilinear: III, § 6, no. 3.

Matrices differing only by the order of the columns, rows: II, § 10, no. 9.
Matrices, equivalent: II, § 10, no. 9.
Matrices, similar square: II, § 10, no. 9.

Matrix, contragredient, of an invertible matrix: II, § 10, no. 7.
Matrix, diagonal: II, § 10, no. 7.
Matrix, empty: II, § 10, no. 1.
Matrix, invertible: II, § 10, no. 7.

Matrix, lower triangular, upper triangular: II, § 10, no. 7.
Matrix, matrix of type (p, q) : II, § 10, no. 1.
Matrix, monomial: II, § 10, no. 7.
Matrix obtained by bordering a matrix: II, § 10, no. 1.
Matrix obtained by suppressing columns, rows: II, § 10, no. 1.
Matrix of a linear mapping with respect to two bases: II, § 10, no. 4.
Matrix of a linear system: II, § 10, no. 4.
Matrix of an element with respect to a basis: II, § 10, no. 4.
Matrix of an endomorphism with respect to a basis: II, § 10, no. 7.
Matrix of a permutation: II, § 10, no. 7.

Matrix of a semi-linear mapping with respect to two bases: II, § 10, no. 6,
Matrix of passing from one basis to another: II, § 10, no. 8.
Matrix, scalar: II, § 10, no. 7.

694



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Matrix, square, square matrix of order n: II, § 10, no. 7.

Matrix, unimodular: III, § 8, no. 4.

Matrix units: II, § 10, no. 3.

Matrix with only zeros below (above) the diagonal: II, § 10, no. 7.

Matrix, zero: II, § 10, no. 2.

Maximal ideal: I, § 8, no. 6.

G-mean: I, § 6, Exercise 8.

Minimal normal stable subgroups: I, § 4, Exercise 15.

Minimal simple group: I, § 6, Exercise 27.

Minor, minor of order/* of a matrix: III, § 8, no. 5.

Minors, complementary: III, § 8, no. 6.

Mixed tensor: III, § 5, no. 6.

Module, bigraded: II, § 11, no. 2.

Module, divisible: II, § 7, Exercise 33.

Module, dual: II, § 2, no. 3.

Module, faithful: II, § 1, no. 12.

Module, faithful, associated with a module: II, § 1, no. 12.

Module, free: II, § 1, no. 11.

Module, graded free: II, § 11, no. 2.

Module, graded, graded module with positive degrees: II, § 11, no.

Module, graded quotient: II, § 11, no. 3.

Module, indecomposable: II, § 2, Exercise 21.

Module, injective: II, § 2, Exercise 11.

Module, left, right module, A-module: II, § 1, no. 1.

Module, monogeneous: II, § 1, no. 12.

Module of finite length: II, § 1, no. 10.

Module of formal linear combinations: II, § 1, no. 11.

Module of linear relations: II, § 1, no. 11.

Module over an algebra: III, § 4, no. 3.

Module, product: II, § 1, no. 5.

Module, projective: II, § 2, no. 2.

Module, quotient: II, § 1, no. 3.

Module, reflexive : II, § 2, no. 7.

Module, torsion-free, over an integral domain: II, § 7, no. 10.

Module, torsion, over an integral domain: II, § 7, no. 10.

Monogeneous group: I, § 4, no. 10.

Monogenous module: II, § 1, no. 2.

Monoid: I, § 2, no. 1.

Monoid defined by generators and relations: I, § 7, no. 2.

Monoid, free, over a set: I, § 7, no. 2.

Monoid of differences: I, § 2, no. 4.

Monoid of fractions with denominators in S : I, § 2, no. 4.

Monoid operating faithfully on a set: I, § 5, no. 1.



695



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Monoidal sum: I, § 7, no. 3.

Monomial: III, § 2, no. 9.

Morphism, algebra: III, § 1, no. 1.

Morphism, A-module: II, § 1, no. 2.

Morphism, cogebra: III, § 11, no. 1.

Morphism, graded bigebra, left graded bigebra morphism: III, § 11, no. 4.

Morphism, graded cogebra: III, § 11, no. 1.

Morphism, magma: I, § 1, no. 1.

Morphism, monoid : I, § 2, no. 1 .

Morphism of extensions : I, § 6, no. 1 .

Morphism, ring: I, § 8, no. 4.

Morphism, unital algebra: III, §4, no. 5.

Morphism, unital magma : I, § 2, no. 1 .

&lt;j&gt;-morphism (&lt;{&gt; a homomorphism of one monoid of operators into another) :

I, § 5, no. 1.
^-morphism (&lt;j&gt; a mapping of one set of operators into another) : I, § 3,

no. 1.
M-morphism (M a monoid of operators) : I, § 5, no. 1 .
Q-morphism (Q a set of operators) : I, § 3, no. 1.
Multiadditive, Z-multilinear, mapping: II, § 3, no. 9.
Multidegree in the free algebra of a monoid: III, § 2, Exercise 13.
Multiindex: I, § 7, no. 7.
Multilinear form: II, § 3, no. 9.
G-multilinear mapping: II, § 3, no. 9.
Multimodule: II, § 1, no. 14.
Multimodule, quotient: II, § 1, no. 14.
Multiple, left, right: I, § 8, no. 1.
Multiplication: I, § 1, no. 1.
Multiplication in an algebra. Ill, § 1, no. 1.
Multiplication table: III, § 1, no. 7.
Multiplicative group of a ring: I, § 8, no. 1.

Negative of an element: I, § 2, no. 3.

Negative rational integer: I, § 2, no. 5.

Negative rational number: I, § 9, no. 4.

S-neighbouring element: I, § 7, Exercise 18.

Nielson-Schreier Theorem: I, § 7, Exercise 20.

Nilpotent group, nilpotent group of class n: I, § 6, no. 3.

Norm, Cayley: III, § 2, no. 4.

Norm in a quadratic algebra: III, § 2, no. 3.

Norm of an element in a K-algebra relative to K: III, § 9, no. 3.

Norm of a scalar relative to a module: III, § 9, no. 1.

Normal stable subgroup : I, § 4, no. 4.

696



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Normal subgroup : I, § 4, no. 4.

Normalizer: I, § 5, no. 3.

Normalizing (element, subset) a subset: I, § 5, no. 3.

Null element: I, § 2, no. 1.

Number, prime: I, § 4, no. 10.

Number, rational: I, § 9, no. 4.

Number (rational), negative, positive, strictly negative, strictly positive: I,

§ 9, no. 4.
Numerator: I, § 2, no. 4.

Octonions, Cayley: III, Appendix, no. 3.

Octonions of type (a, (3, y, 8) (algebra of) : III, Appendix, no. 3.

Odd permutation: I, § 5, no. 7.

Operation by left, right, translation: I, § 5, no. 1.

Operation, left, right (laws of) : I, § 5, no. 1.

Operation, left, right, of a monoid: I, § 5, no. 1.

Operation, simply transitive: I, § 5, no. 6.

Operation, transitive: I, § 5, no. 5.

Operation, trivial: I, § 5, no. 2.

Operator: I, § 3, no. 1.

Opposite algebra: III, § 1, no. 1.

Opposite cogebra: III, § 11, no. 1.

Opposite law: I, § 1, no. 1.

Opposite magma: I, § 1, no. 1.

Opposite to an M-set, M°-set: I, § 5, no. 1.

Opposite ring: I, § 8, no. 3.

Orbit: I, § 5, no. 4.

Orbital mapping: I, § 5, no. 4.

Order, element of infinite: I, § 4, no. 10.

Order of a cycle : I, § 5, no. 7.

Order of a formal power series with respect to certain indeterminates: III,

§2, no. 11.
Order of a group: I, § 4, no. 1.
Order of an element in a group: I, § 4, no. 10.
Order of a square matrix: II, § 10, no. 7.
Order, total order, of a formal power series: III, § 2, no. 11.
Ordered sequence: I, § 1, no. 2.
Ordered sequences, similar: I, § 1, no. 2.
Origin: I, §2, no. 1.

Origin, choice of, in an afline space: II, § 9, no. 1.
Orthogonal elements, sets: II, § 2, no. 3.
Orthogonal family of projectors: II, § 1, no. 8.
Orthogonal, submodule, to a subset of E (resp. E*) : II, § 2, no. 4.

697



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Parallel linear varieties: II, § 9, no. 3.

Parallelogram: II, § 9, Exercise 1.

Parameters, direction, of an affine line : II, § 9, no. 3.

Partial derivative: III, § 10, no. 11.

Partial graduation: II, § 11, no. 1.

Passage, matrix of: II, § 10, no. 8.

Permutable elements: I, § 1, no. 5.

Permutation, even, odd : I, § 5, no. 7.

Plane, affine: II, § 9, nos. 1 and 3.

Plane passing through in a vector space: II, § 7, no. 3.

Plane, projective: II, § 9, no. 5.

Point of an affine space: II, § 9, no. 1.

Point of a projective space : II, § 9, no. 5.

Points, affinely independent: II, § 9, no. 3.

Points at infinity: II, § 9, no. 8.

Polynomial, characteristic, of an element in a K-algebra: III, § 9, no. 3.

Polynomial, characteristic, of an endomorphism: III, § 8, no. 11.

Polynomial, characteristic, of a scalar with respect to a module: III, §9,

no. 1.
Polynomial containing no term in X v : III, § 2, no. 9.
Polynomial identities: III, § 2, no. 9.
Polynomial of degree n: III, § 2, no. 9.
Polynomial relators: III, § 2, no. 9.
Polynomial with no constant term: III, § 2, no. 9.
Polynomial with respect to a family of indeterminates, with coefficients in a

ring: III, § 2, no. 9.
Positive rational integer: I, § 2, no. 5.
Positive rational number: I, § 9, no. 4.
Power, exterior, of a linear mapping: III, § 7, no. 4.
Power, exterior, of a matrix: III, § 8, no. 5.
Power, exterior, of a module : III, § 7, no. 4.
Power, n-th, under an associative law: I, § 1, no. 3.
Power, symmetric, of a linear mapping, of a module: III, § 6, no. 3.
Power, tensorial, of a linear mapping: III, § 5, no. 2.
Power, tensorial, of a module: III, § 5, no. 1.
Presentation of a group : I, § 7, no. 6.
Presentation of an algebra: III, § 2, no. 8.
Presented, finitely (group) : I, § 7, Exercise 16.
Preservation when passing to the quotient: I, § 1, no. 6.
Prime ideal: I, § 9, no. 3.
Prime number: I, § 4, no. 10.
Prime, relatively (integers) : I, § 8, no. 10.
Primitive element in a free group : I, § 7, Exercise 26.

698



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Primitive element in a free magma generated by a single element: I, § 7,

Exercise 7.
Primitive element of a graded bigebra: III, §11, no. 8.
Principal G-set, homogeneous : I, § 5, no. 6.
Principal ideal: I, § 8, no. 6.
Principal series: I, § 4, Exercise 17.
Principal set under G, homogeneous : I, § 5, no. 6.
Principle of extension by linearity: II, § 1, no. 7.
Problem, linear: II, § 2, no. 8.
Product algebra: III, § 1, no. 4.
Product, block, of matrices: II, § 10, no. 5.
Product, crossed: III, § 2, Exercise 11.

Product, exterior, of a/»-vector and a ^-vector: III, § 7, no. 1.
Product, external semi-direct, of G by F relative to t: I, § 6, no. 1.
Product, fibre, of groups with operators : I, § 4, no. 8.
Product, fibre, of modules: II, § 1, Exercise 4.
Product, free, of algebras: III, § 5, Exercise 6.
Product, free, of groups : I, § 7, no. 5.

Product, graded tensor, of two graded modules: II, § 11, no. 5.
Product, graded tensor, of graded algebras: III, § 4, nos. 7 and 9.
Product group, internal product group, of a family of quotient groups : I,

§ 4, no. 8.
Product group with operators : I, § 4, no. 8.

Product, internal direct, direct product, product, of subgroups : I, § 4, no. 9.
Product magma: I, § 1, no. 1.
Product of K'-structures: II, § 8, no. 3.
Product of laws of composition: I, § 1, no. 1.

Product of matrices calculated according to a mapping: II, § 10, no. 2.
Product of matrices calculated in a ring: II, § 10, no. 3.
Product of modules: II, § 1, no. 5.
Product of multimodules: II, § 1, no. 14.
Product of an operator and an element: I, § 3, no. 1.
Product of an ordered sequence: I, § 1, no. 2.
Product of two elements: I, § 1, no. 1.
Product of two-sided ideals : I, § 8, no. 9.
Product, (right, left) inner: III, § 11, nos. 6 and 7.
Product ring: I, § 8, no. 10.

Product, symmetric, of multilinear mappings: III, § 11, no. 2.
Product, tensor, of a family of Z-modules relative to a triple (c,p, q) : II, § 3,

no. 9.
Product, tensor, of algebras : III, § 4, no. 1 .
Product, tensor, of an infinite family of algebras: III, § 4, no. 5.
Product, tensor, of bases of algebras : III, § 4, no. 5.

699



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Product, tensor, of cogebras: III, §11, no. 1.

Product, tensor, of two bases: II, § 3, no. 7.

Product, tensor, of two elements: II, § 3, no. 1.

Product, tensor, of two linear mappings: II, § 3, no. 2.

Product, tensor, of two matrices over a commutative ring: II, § 10, no. 10.

Product, tensor, of two modules: II, § 3, no. 1.

Product, tensor, of two multimodules : II, § 3, no. 4.

Product, tensor, of two semi-linear mappings : II, § 3, no. 3.

Projection homomorphism: I, §4, no. 8.

Projective field : II, § 9, no. 9.

Projective group: II, § 9, no. 10.

Projective hyperplane, plane: II, § 9, no. 7.

Projective line: II, § 9, no. 5.

Projective mapping: II, § 9, no. 10.

Projective module: II, § 2, no. 2.

Projective space: II, § 9, nos. 5 and 11.

Projectively free, projectively related, family: II, § 9, no. 7.

Projector: II, § 1, no. 8.

Pseudomodule, left, right: II, Appendix, no. 2.

Pseudo-ring: I, § 8, no. 1.

Pseudo-ring with zero square: I, § 8, no. 3.

Pure/&gt;-vector: III, § 11, no. 13.

Pure quaternion: III, § 2, Exercise 3.

Quadratic algebra: III, § 2, no. 3.

Quasi-group : I, § 3, Exercise 6.

Quaternion, pure: III, § 2, Exercise 3.

Quaternion algebra: III, § 2, no. 5.

Quaternionic group : I, § 6, Exercise 4.

Quotient algebra: III, § 1, no. 2.

Quotient graduation: II, § 11, no. 3.

Quotient group with operators : I, § 4, no. 4.

Quotient law: I, § 1, no. 6.

Quotient magma: I, § 1, no. 11.

Quotient module, vector space: II, § 1, no. 3.

Quotient multimodule: II, § 1, no. 14.

Quotient of an action: I, § 3, no. 3.

Quotient ring: I, § 8, no. 7.

Quotients of a composition series of a group with operators: I, § 4, no. 7.

Rank of a free group: I, § 7, Exercise 14.

Rank of a linear mapping of vector spaces: II, § 7, no. 4.

Rank of a linear system over a field: II, § 7, no. 6.

700



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Rank of a matrix over a field: II, § 10, no. 12.

Rank of an affine linear mapping: II, § 9, no. 4.

Rank of an element in a tensor product of vector spaces: II, § 7, no. 8.

Rank of a semi-linear mapping of vector spaces: II, § 7, no. 4.

Rank of a subset of a module over an integral domain: II, § 7, no. 10.

Rank of a subset of a vector space: II, § 7, no. 2.

Ratio of a homothety: II, § 1, no. 1.

Rational integer: I, § 2, no. 5.

Rational number: I, § 9, no. 4.

Rational numbers, field of : I, § 9, no. 4.

Rational over a subfield (linear form) : II, § 8, no. 4.

Rational over a subfield (linear mapping) : II, § 8, no. 3.

Rational over a subfield (subspace, vector) : II, § 8, no. 2.

Reduced decomposition of an element of an amalgamated sum: I, § 7,

no. 3.
Reflexive module: II, § 2, no. 7.

Regular, left regular, right regular, element: I, § 2, no. 2.
/&gt;-regular element: I, § 6, Exercise 28.
Related system, subset: II, § 1, no. 11, and § 9, no. 7.
Relation, equivalence, compatible with a law of composition: I, § 1, no. 6.
Relation, equivalence, compatible with an action : I, § 3, no. 3.
Relation, equivalence, generated by a family of ordered pairs: I, § 1, no. 6.
Relation, equivalence, left, right, compatible with a law of composition: I,

§3, no. 3.
Relations, commutativity, in a multiplication table: III, § 1, no. 7.
Relations, Grassmann: III, § 11, no. 13.
Relations, module of linear: II, § 1, no. 11.
Relatively prime integers: I, § 8, no. 11.
Relator: I, § 7, no. 6 and III, § 2, no. 8.
Relator, universal: III, § 2, no. 8.
Relators, ideal of: III, § 3, no. 8.

Relators of a presentation: I, § 7, no. 6 and III, § 2, no. 8.
Relators, polynomial: III, § 2, no. 9.
Residue of a semi-group: I, § 2, Exercise 11.
Residually finite group: I, § 5, Exdrcise 5.
Restricted algebra of a monoid: III, § 2, no. 10.
Restricted sum, internal: I, § 4, no. 9.
Restricted sum of groups: I, § 4, no. 9.

Restricted sum of groups with respect to subgroups: I, § 4, no. 9.
Restriction of scalars (algebra obtained by) : III, § 1, no. 5.
Resulting (element) from substituting elements for indeterminates : I, § 7,

no. 5.
Retraction of an extension: I, § 6, no. 1.

701



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Right hand side of a linear equation, right hand sides of a linear system- II

§2, no. 8.
Ring: I, §8, no. 1.
Ring, Boolean: I, § 9, Exercise 8.
Ring, commutative: I, § 8, no. 1.

Ring (graded, graded with positive degrees, bigraded) : II, § 1 1, no. 2.
Ring, graded quotient: II, § 11, no. 3.

Ring obtained by the adjunction of a unit element: II, Appendix, no. 1.
Ring of endomorphisms of a commutative group: I, § 8, no. 4.
Ring of fractions with denominators in S: I, § 8, no. 12.
Ring of integers modulo n: I, § 8, no. 11.
Ring of polynomials which are not commutative relative to an endomorphism

and a derivation: III, § 10, Exercise 3.
Ring, opposite: I, § 8, no. 3.
Ring, product: I, § 8, no. 10.
Ring, quotient: I, § 8, no. 7.
Ring, total, of fractions: I, § 8, no. 2.
Ring, zero: I, §8, no. 3.
Row of a matrix: II, § 10, no. 1.
Rule, sign: I, §8, no. 1.

Scalar: II, § 1, no. 1.

Scalar linear equation: II, § 2, no. 8.

Scalar matrix: II, § 10, no. 7.

Schreier's Theorem on composition series: I, § 4, no. 7.

Section of an extension: I, § 6, no. 2.

Semi-direct product of groups: I, § 6, no. 1.

Semi-group, left, right: I, § 2, Exercise 11.

Semi-homomorphism, algebra, algebra p-homomorphism : III, § 1, no. 5.

Semi-linear mapping: II, § 1, no. 13.

Sequence, exact: II, § 1, no. 4.

Sequence, ordered: I, § 1, no. 2.

Sequence, split exact: II, § 1, no. 9.

Sequences, similar ordered: I, § 1, no. 2.

Series, algebra of formal power: III, § 2, no. 11.

Series, composition: I, § 4, no. 6.

Series, derived: I, § 6, no. 4.

Series, equivalent decomposition: I, § 4, no. 7.

Series, finer composition: I, § 4, no. 7.

Series, formal power: III, § 2, no. 11.

Series, Jordan-Holder: I, § 4, no. 7.

Series, lower central: I, § 6, no. 3.

Series, normal: I, §4,.Exercise 17.

702



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Series, principal: I, §4, Exercise 17.

G-set, homogeneous (G a group of operators) : I, § 5, no. 5.

G-set, homogeneous principal, homogeneous principal set under G: I, §5,

no. 6.
Set, generating, of a group : I, § 4, no. 3.
Set, generating, of a magma: I, § 1, no. 4.
M-set (M a monoid of operators) : I, § 5, no. 1.
M°-set opposite to an M-set: I, § 5, no. 1.
Set of degrees of a graded group: II, § 11, no. 1.
Set of subgroups satisfying the maximal condition, the minimal condition: I,

§4, Exercise 15.
Sets, orthogonal: II, § 2, no. 4.
G-sets, weakly equivalent: I, § 5, Exercise 26.
Shift, shifting: II, § 11, no. 2.
Signature of a permutation: I, § 5, no. 7.
Sign of a rational number: I, § 9, no. 4.
Similar endomorphisms: III, § 8, Exercise 26.
Similar matrices: II, § 10, no. 9.
Similar ordered sequences: I, § 1, no. 2.
Simple group : I, § 4, no. 4.
Simply transitive operation: I, § 5, no. 6.
Skew field: I, §9, no. 1.
Skew graded bigebra: III, § 11, no. 4.
Skew-symmetric tensor: III, § 7, no. 4.
Skew-symmetrized tensor: III, § 7, no. 4.
Skew tensor product of graded algebras: III, § 4, nos. 7 and 8.
Solution of a linear equation, of a linear system: II, § 2, no. 8.
Solution, trivial, zero solution of a homogeneous linear equation: II, § 2, no. 8.
Solvable group, solvable group of class re: I, § 6, no. 4.
Space, affine, attached to a vector space: II, § 9, no. 1.
Space, canonical projective, associated with a vector space: II, § 9, no. 8.
Space, projective: II, § 9, nos. 5 and 11.
Space, projective, derived from a vector space: II, § 9, no. 5.
Space, quotient vector, quotient space: II, § 1, no. 3.
Space, right, left, vector, over a field: II, § 1, no. 1.
Space, vector, associated with a module over an integral domain: II, § 7,

no. 10.
Space, vector, obtained by taking an origin in an affine space: II, § 9, no. 1.
Space, vector, of translations of an affine space: II, § 9, no. 1.
Split exact sequence: II, § 1, no. 10.

Stabilizing (operator, set of operators) a subset: I, § 5, no. 2.
Stabilizing, strictly (operator, set of operators), a subset: I, § 5, no. 2.
Stable subgroup of a group with operators: I, § 4, no. 3.

703



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Stable subset: I, § 1, no. 4.

Strictly negative, strictly positive, rational integer: I, § 2, no. 5.

Strictly negative, strictly positive, rational number: I, § 9, no. 4.

Strict stabilizer: I, § 5, no. 2.

Strictly stabilizing a subset: I, § 5, no. 2.

Strict transporter: I, § 5, no. 2.

Strongly associative subset: III, Appendix, no. 1.

Structures, module (multimodule), compatible: II, § 1, no. 14.

Structure, projective space: II, § 9, no. 11.

K'-structure, induced: II, § 8, no. 2.

K'-structure on a vector K-space: II, § 8, no. 1.

K'-structure, product: II, § 8, no. 3.

Subalgebra: III, § 1, no. 2.

Subalgebra generated by a subset: III, § 1, no. 2.

Subalgebra, graded: III, § 3, no. 2.

Subfield:I, §9, no. 1.

Subfield generated by a subset: I, § 9, no. 1.

Subgroup, characteristic: I, § 5, no. 3.

Subgroup, invariant stable, invariant subgroup: I, § 4, no. 4.

Subgroup, normal stable, normal subgroup: I, § 4, no. 4.

Subgroup, stable, generated by a subset: I, § 4, no. 3.

Subgroup, stable subgroup: I, § 4, no. 3.

Subgroup, Sylow, Sylow /&gt;-subgroup : I, § 6, no. 6.

Submagma: I, § 1, no. 4.

Submagna generated by a subset: I, § 1, no. 4.

Submagma, unital: I, § 2, no. 1.

Submagma, unital, generated by a subset: I, § 2, no. 1.

Submatrix: II, § 10, no. 1.

Submodule: II, § 1, no. 3.

Submodule, component, of a direct sum of modules: II, § 1, no. 6.

Submodule generated by a family: II, § 1, no. 7.

Submodule, graded: II, § 11, no. 3.

Submodule, irreducible: II, § 2, Exercise 16.

Submodule, orthogonal (or totally orthogonal) to a subset of E (resp. E*)

II, §2, no. 4.
Submodule, torsion, of a module over an integral domain: II, § 7, no. 10.
Submodule, zero: II, § 1, no. 3.
Submodules, supplementary: II, § 1, no. 9.
Submultimodule: II, § 1, nos. 14.
Subring: I, § 8, no. 5.

Subring generated by a subset: I, § 8, no. 5.
Subring, graded: II, § 11, no. 3.
Subset, affine: II, § 9, no. 3.

704



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Subset centralizing a subset: I, § 5, no. 3.

Subset, free, related subset: II, § 1, no. 11.

Subset, homogeneous, of degree p with respect to certain ^determinates in a

formal power series: III, § 2, no. 11.
Subset normalizing a subset: I, § 5, no. 3.
Subset, stable: I, § 1, no. 4 and § 3, no. 2.

Subset, stable, generated by a subset: I, § 1, no. 4 and § 3, no. 2.
Subset, strongly associative: III, Appendix, no. 1.
Subset, symmetric: I, §4, no. 1.
Subsets, conjugate : I, § 5, no. 4.
Subspaces associated with a homogeneous element of the exterior algebra: III,

§ 7, no. 2.
Subspace associated with a homogeneous element of the symmetric algebra:

III, § 6, no. 2.
Subspace associated with a homogeneous element of the tensor algebra: III,

§ 5, no. 2.
Subspaces associated with an element of a tensor product of vector spaces: II,

§ 7, no. 8.
Subspace rational over a subfield: II, § 8, no. 2.
Subspace, vector, subspace: II, § 1, no. 3.
Sum, amalgamated, of modules: II, § 1, Exercise 5.
Sum, amalgamated, of monoids: II, § 7, no. 3.
Sum, direct: I, § 4, no. 9.

Sum, direct, of a family of submodules : II, § 1, no. 8.
Sum, external direct, of a family of submodules: II, § 1, no. 6.
Sum, internal restricted, of subgroups: I, § 4, no. 9.
Sum, monoidal: I, § 7, no. 3.

Sum of a family of elements of finite support: I, § 2, no. 1.
Sum of a family of left ideals, of right ideals : I, § 8, no. 6.
Sum of a family of submodules: II, § 1, no. 7.
Sum of an ordered sequence: I, § 1, no. 2.
Sum of two elements: I, § 1, no. 1.
Sum of two matrices: II, § 10, no. 2.
Sum, restricted, of groups with respect to subgroups, restricted sum of groups:

I, §4, no. 9.
Supersolvable group: I, § 6, Exercise 26.
Supplementary submodules: II, § 1, no. 9.
Support of a cycle : I, § 5, no. 7.
Support of a family: I, § 2, no. 1.
Suppress columns, rows, in a matrix: II, § 10, no. 1.
Sylow subgroup : I, § 6, no. 6.
Symbol, Kronecker: II, § 1, no. 11.
Symmetric algebra of a module: III, § 6, no. 1.

705



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Symmetric group: I, § 4, no. 1.

Symmetric multilinear mapping: III, § 6, no. 3.

Symmetric power of a linear mapping: III, § 6, no. 3.

Symmetric power of a module: III, § 6, no. 3.

Symmetric product of two multilinear mapping: III, § 11, no. 2.

Symmetric subset in a group: I, § 4, no. 1.

Symmetric tensor: III, § 6, no. 3.

Symmetrization of a tensor: III, § 6, no. 3.

System, direct, of graded algebras: III, § 3, no. 3.

System, direct, of magmas: I, § 10, no. 3.

System, direct, of modules: II, § 6, no. 2.

System, direct, of rings (groups, fields) : I, § 10, no. 3.

System, free, related system: II, § 1, no. 11.

System, generating, of a group: I, § 4, no. 3.

System, generating, of a magma: I, § 1, no. 4.

System, generating, of a module: II, § 1, no. 7.

System, generating, of a projective space: II, § 9, no. 8.

System, generating, of a unital magma : I, § 2, no. 1 .

System, generating, of an algebra: III, § 1, no. 2.

System, inverse, of algebras: III, § 1, no. 6.

System, inverse, of magmas: II, § 10, no. 1.

System, inverse, of modules: II, § 6, no. 1.

System, inverse, of rings (groups, fields) : I, § 10, no. 1.

System of equations of a vector subspace: II, § 7, no. 5.

System of factors: III, § 2, Exercise 11.

System of homogeneous coordinates of a point: II, § 9, no. 6.

System of linear equations, linear system, homogeneous linear system: II,

§2, no. 8.
System, trivial, of commutation factors: III, § 4, no. 7.

Table, diagonal, lower triangle, upper triangular, of matrices: II, § 10, no. 7.

Table, multiplication, of an algebra: III, § 1, no. 7.

Table, square, of matrices: II, § 10, no. 5.

Tensor algebra of a module: III, § 5, no. 1.

Tensor, contravariant, covariant tensor, mixed tensor: III, § 5, no. 6.

Tensor of type (I, J) : III, § 5, no. 6.

Tensor, skew-symmetric: III, § 7, no. 4.

Tensor, symmetric: III, § 6, no. 3.

Tensorial power of a linear mapping: III, § 5, no. 2.

Tensorial power of a module : III, § 5, no. 1 .

Term, constant, of a formal power series: III, § 2, no. 11.

Term, constant, of a polynomial : III, § 2, no. 9.

Term in X a in a polynomial : III, §&gt;2, no. 9.

706



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Term of a formal power series: III, § 2, no. 11.

Term of a polynomial: III, § 2, no. 9.

Term of a sum: I, § 1, no. 2.

Term of degree p with respect to certain indeterminates in a formal power

series: III, § 2, no. 11.
Term of total degree p in a formal power series: III, § 2, no. 11.
Theorem, associativity: I, § 1, no. 3.
Theorem, Cayley-Hamilton: III, § 8, no. 11.
Theorem, commutativity: I, § 1, no. 5.
Theorem, Desargues's: II, § 9, Exercise 15.
Theorem, Erdos-Kaplansky: II, § 7, Exercise 3.
Theorem, fundamental, of projective geometry: II, § 9, Exercise 16.
Theorem, Hall's: I, § 6, Exercise 7.
Theorem, Jordan-Holder: I, §4, no. 7.
Theorem, Kaplansky's: II, § 2, Exercise 2.
Theorem, Krull's: I, § 8, no. 6.
Theorem, Nielsen-Schreier: I, § 7, Exercise 20.
Theorem of the complete quadrilaterial: II, § 9, Exercise 13.
Theorem, Pappus's: II, § 9, Exercise 14.
Theorem, Schreier's: I, § 4, no. 7.
Torsion element, module, submodule: II, § 7, no. 10.
Torsion-free module: II, § 7, no. 10.
Total algebra of a monoid: III, § 2, no. 10.
Total graduation: II, § 11, no. 1.

Totally orthogonal (submodule) to a subset: II, § 2, no. 4.
Trace, Cayley: III, § 2, no. 4.
Trace in a quadratic algebra: III, § 2, no. 3.
Trace of a matrix: II, § 10, no. 11.
Trace of an element in a K-algebra: III, § 9, no. 3.
Trace of an endomorphism: II, § 4, no. 3.
Trace of a scalar with respect to a module: III, § 9, no. 1.
Transitive operation: I, § 5, no. 5.
Transitivity formulae: III, § 9, no. 4.

Translation in an afline space, space of translations : II, § 9, no. 1.
Translation, left, right: I, § 2, no. 2.

Translation, left, right (monoid operating on itself by) : I, § 5, no. 1.
Transporter, strict transporter: I, § 5, no. 2.

Transpose of a linear mapping, of a semi-linear mapping: II, § 2, no. 5.
Transpose of a matrix: II, § 10, no. 1.
Transposition: I, § 5, no. 7.
Transvection: II, § 10, Exercise 11.

Triangular, lower, upper triangular, matrix: II, § 10, no. 7.
Trivial extension: I, §6, no. 1.

707



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Trivial graduation: II, § 11, no. 1.

Trivial homomorphism : I, § 2, no. 1.

Trivial operation: I, § 5, no. 2.

Trivial solution of a homogeneous linear equation: II, § 2, no. 8.

Trivial system of commutation factors: III, § 4, no. 7.

Two-sided ideal: I, § 8, no. 6 and III, § 1, no. 2.

Type, exponential, group of: I, § 7, Exercise 39.

Type A, graduation of: II, § 11, no. 1.

Unimodular endomorphism: III, § 8, no. 1.
Unimodular group: III, § 8, no. 9.
Unimodular matrix: III, § 8, no. 3.
/&gt;-unipotent element: I, § 6, Exercise 28.
Unit element of an algebra: III, § 1, no. 1.
Unit, left, right, in a groupoid: I, § 4, Exercise 23.
Unit, unit element of a magma: I, § 2, no. 1.
Unital algebra: III, § 1, no. 1.

Unital algebra homomorphism, morphism: III, § 1, no. 1.
Unital homomorphism: I, § 2, no. 1.
Unital magma: I, § 2, no. 1.
Units, matrix: II, § 10, no. 3.

Universal algebra denned by a generating system related by a family of rela-
tors: III, §2, no. 8.
Universal algebra subjected to identities : III, § 2, no. 8.
Universal relator: III, § 2, no. 8.
Unknowns of a linear system: II, § 2, no. 8.

Value, absolute, of a rational number: I, § 9, no. 4.

Value of an element of a free algebra: III, § 2, no. 8.

Vandermonde determinant: III, § 8, no. 6.

Variety, affine linear, affine linear variety generated by a family: II, § 9, no. 3.

Variety, linear: II, § 9, nos. 3, 7 and 11.

Variety, projective linear, projective linear variety generated by a family:

II, §9, nos. 7 and 11.
Varieties, parallel linear: II, § 9, no. 3.
Vector: II, § 1, no. 1.

Vector, direction, of an affine line: II, § 9, no. 3.
Vector, free, of an affine space: II, § 9, no. 1.
/»-vector: III, § 7, no. 1.
j!»-vector, pure: III, § 11, no. 13.
Vector rational over a subfield: II, § 8, no. 2.
Vector space: II, § 1, no. 1.

Word: I, § 7, no. 2.
708



INDEX OF TERMINOLOGY

Weight of a homogeneous element: II, § 11, no. 1.
With no fixed point (automorphism) : I, § 6, Exercise 23.

Zassenhaus's Lemma : I, § 4, no. 7.

Zero: I, § 2, no. 1.

Zero matrix: II, § 10, no. 22.

Zero ring: I, § 8, no. 3.

Zero solution of a linear equation: II, § 2, no. 8.

Zero submodule: II, § 1, no. 3.



Made and printed in Great Britain by William Clowes &amp; Sons, Limited, London, Beccles and Colchester




ALGEBRA



PARTI




KEIMANH



512



BOU



0639

